# SHAP

​SHapley Additive exPlanations, 
​or SHAP, was introduced in 2017. 
​They build off of the concept of Shapley values. 
​In the Shapley values video, 
​we talked about how they are 
​extremely computationally expensive, 
​and so they're not very practical. 
​The SHAP method proposes to approximate 
​Shapley values instead of outright calculating them. 
​There are a number of ways to 
​approximate Shapley values, including, 
​but not limited to, kernel SHAP, 
​tree SHAP, and deep SHAP. 
​In this lecture, we're going to focus on 
​kernel SHAP, but in the code demo, 
​we will implement tree SHAP, 
​so you can get a feel for a couple 
​of different SHAP approaches. 
​Kernel SHAP is actually pretty 
​similar in concept to LIME, 
​where we are approximating 
​Shapley values with a linear regression model. 
​We will sample feature subsets and fit 
​a linear regression model where 
​the output value is the prediction, 
​and our variables are whether 
​a feature is present or absent. 
​The coefficients of our fitted linear regression model 
​are the approximations of our Shapley values. 
​Steps to kernel SHAP include, 
​one, sampling our coalitions, 
​getting a prediction for each of our samples by 
​converting it to original feature space 
​and then applying our model to it, 
​computing the weight for each 
​sample with the SHAP kernel, 
​fitting the weighted linear model, 
​and returning approximations of our Shapley values, 
​which are the coefficients from the linear model. 
​Here is a great visualization 
​from the original SHAP paper that 
​shows feature attribution values 
​assigned to features by a human, 
​by LIME, and by SHAP. 
​We can see visually that SHAP is much more 
​consistent with human estimates than LIME. 
​When SHAP is applied to image data, again, 
​we see higher performance of 
​our SHAP values versus other explainability methods. 
​There are some really interesting ways 
​to visualize outputs from SHAP. 
​Here are just a few examples from 
​the Interpretable Machine Learning book. 
​Let's evaluate the pros and cons of 
​SHAP as an explainable AI technique. 
​SHAP is based on Shapley values, 
​so a lot of the pros remain the same. 
​The difference between the prediction 
​and the average prediction is 
​fairly distributed among 
​the feature values of the instance. 
​It enables contrastive explanations. 
​You can compare to the average prediction, 
​a subset, or even to a single data point. 
​In contrast to Shapley values, 
​SHAP approximations provide much faster computation. 
​However, just because it is relatively faster, 
​it does not mean that it is fast. 
​Kernel SHAP can still be pretty slow. 
​It also ignores feature dependence. 
​Just like Shapley values, 
​you need access to the data, 
​and it is possible to create 
​intentionally misleading interpretations with SHAP, 
​and it can be used to hide biases. 
