# Individual Conditional Expectation (ICE) Plots

​Individual conditional expectation or 
​ICE Plots were introduced in 2014 by Goldstein et al. 
​ICE Plots plot one line per instance that displays how 
​the instances prediction changes 
​when a particular feature changes. 
​By visualizing all of our instances, 
​we can improve local explainability 
​while also gaining a better global understanding. 
​In the figure from the original paper shown here, 
​each light gray line shown is a single instance. 
​This is a great way to visualize that for some instances. 
​A higher age is associated with higher predicted values, 
​while other instances show that higher ages 
​are actually associated with lower predicted values. 
​How does this work? First, we 
​select an instance and a feature of interest. 
​We keep all other features constant and create 
​variants of the instance by 
​replacing the features values. 
​We make predictions with the Blackbox model 
​for newly created instances, 
​and now we have a set of points for 
​an instance with the feature value 
​and respective predictions. 
​Here is a visualization of ICE Plots 
​of predicted bicycle rentals by weather conditions. 
​If we focus on the temperature one, 
​you can see an increase in 
​predicted bicycle rentals increases 
​as the first temperature increases, 
​then drops off after approximately 30 degrees. 
​Note the variation in different instances, 
​which is nicely visualized by the individual curves. 
​It can sometimes be difficult to tell whether ICE curves 
​differ between individuals because 
​they start at different predictions. 
​To solve this, we can center 
​the curves at a certain point in 
​the feature and display 
​only the difference in the prediction to this point. 
​This is called centered ICE Plots or sea ice. 
​This figure from the original ICE 
​paper displays this nicely. 
​It is difficult to see the trends using the ICE plot, 
​but when it is centered, 
​there is clear differentiation. 
​If we want to know whether changes 
​occur and in which directions they occur, 
​we can look at derivative ICE Plots or d-ICE Plots, 
​where we look at the individual derivatives 
​of the prediction function with respect to a feature. 
​This also makes it easy to determine ranges of 
​feature values where the black box predictions 
​change for some instance, 
​as shown here in Figure 7. 
​Here are more examples of c-ICE and d-ICE Plots. 
​Feel free to pause the video to 
​look at these figures in more detail. 
​So let's evaluate the pros and cons of 
​ICE Plots as an explainable AI visualization technique. 
​ICE Plots are intuitive and easy to understand. 
​They can also uncover heterogeneous relationships. 
​However, ICE Plots can only 
​meaningfully display one feature. 
​Plots can become overcrowded easily, 
​and it is difficult to see the average. 
​It is important to note that if the feature of 
​interest is correlated with the other features, 
​then some points in the lines might be 
​invalid data points according 
​to the joint feature distribution. 
