# A Review of Attention

​First, let's review embeddings. 
​We want to represent a word or a subword as 
​a fixed-length vector for input into a neural network. 
​But text is hard. 
​Consider these two phrases that contain the same word, 
​bank of the river and deposited money at the bank. 
​Bank is the same word in both but has 
​different meanings depending on 
​context or the surrounding words. 
​Embeddings are a method of converting 
​our text information into vectors of real numbers, 
​capturing semantic and syntactic aspects of the data. 
​It acts as a compact representation of the original data, 
​capturing its essential aspects. 
​Let's jump into a simplified version of self-attention. 
​Let's say that we have the phrase bank of the river. 
​We can embed each word as a vector embedding, 
​denoted as V1, 
​V2, V3, and V4, 
​corresponding to each word in the phrase. 
​The goal of self attention is to 
​improve these original embeddings with context. 
​We would ideally like our output to be 
​new representations that are 
​better than the original representations. 
​We're going to call these Y1, 
​Y2, Y3, and Y4. 
​Let's focus on the first word, bank. 
​We know that bank can have multiple meanings 
​depending on its context. 
​Remember, the goal is to go 
​from our original vector embedding 
​V1 to a new vector embedding that is better, Y1. 
​We start by taking the dot product between each vector 
​and every other vector in the sequence V1.V1, 
​V1.V2, V1.V3, and V1.V4. 
​The output are referred to as scores. 
​We take these scores and we 
​normalize them via a soft max function, 
​because we would like to have 
​all of our weights sum to one. 
​Now we have these weights that are normalized scores. 
​These weights are used to reweigh all vectors towards 
​V1 so river influences bank and vice versa. 
​Y1 is this re-weighted vector. 
​We do this for each of the words in our sequence. 
​Something to note here with our process, 
​order has no influence. 
​Proximity has no influence, 
​and it is shape independent, 
​long or short sequences work. 
​You just end up with a longer or shorter weighted sum. 
​Here I am drawing it in another way where we have 
​each of the mathematical operations and their inputs. 
​The dot product of V1 and 
​the original embeddings are the scores, 
​which are then normalized and become our weights. 
​A weighted sum between the weights and 
​our original embeddings create our new vector embeddings, 
​Y1, Y2, 
​Y3, and Y4. 
​One thing to note is that this has all been 
​pure mathematical operations so far. 
​There's nothing being trained. 
​What happens if we introduce trainable parameters? 
​We are going to introduce trainable parameters at 
​each place that the original embeddings are used. 
​These are called keys, queries, and values. 
​They come from a node to 
​databases but don't think about the analogy too hard. 
​Keys are associated with our original embeddings. 
​Our query says, I want V1 to get more context. 
​When I combine query and keys, 
​I want to get back the values. 
​Like I said, don't think about 
​the database analogy too hard here. 
​Now we have parameters that we can train over. 
​We have a key matrix, 
​a query matrix, and a value matrix. 
​These are what we are going to 
​train, our trainable weights. 
​Note that these matrices are k by k, 
​where k is the length of our original embedding vector. 
​If we draw this as a self attention block, 
​we have linear layers where 
​our original vector embeddings combine with our keys, 
​queries, and values trainable matrices. 
​The rest of it is the same. 
​We have our dot product, which 
​gives us scores, we normalize that, 
​which gives us weights, and we 
​perform a weighted sum to get our output. 
​Improved vector embeddings, Y1 through Yn. 
​Now we have a block that we can use to train our keys, 
​queries, and values matrices. 
​These trainable parameters are the same as 
​our trainable weights in 
​a traditional neural network layer. 
​The TLDR here is that self attention 
​is the process of adding more context. 
​Now we can pose the question, 
​do we have enough attention? 
​Consider the word gave in the sentence, 
​I gave my cat Tater a toy. 
​The word gave needs to attend to 
​multiple parts of the sentence simultaneously. 
​It needs to attend to I, 
​to Tater, and to toy. 
​These could all be separate attention mechanisms 
​with their own trained keys, 
​queries, and values, matrices. 
​This brings us to the concept of 
​multi head attention in which we 
​parallelize attention mechanisms 
​by having multiple heads. 
​Here, we have one through H heads. 
​This results in having one through H scores, 
​weights, and final outputs. 
​Now our final output needs to be 
​the same size as our input vector embedding. 
​What we do here is we can catnate, 
​and send our one through 
​H outputs through a dense layer to 
​end up with an output that is 
​the same size as it was previously. 
​We've reviewed self attention, 
​but what about cross attention? 
​Self attention operates within a single sequence. 
​Cross attention is used between two different sequences. 
​Here is how cross attention works. 
​For each element in one sequence, a query sequence, 
​cross attention computes attention scores based on 
​its relationship with 
​every element in the other sequence, 
​the key value sequence? 
​This mechanism enables the model to selectively focus 
​on relevant parts of the other sequence 
​when generating an output. 
​Cross attention is critical for 
​tasks that involve understanding 
​how elements from different 
​sources relate to one another. 
