# Saliency Methods as Alternatives

​Saliency methods can be used as alternatives here. 
​The elephant in the interpretability 
​room paper recommended 
​the following saliency methods as 
​alternatives to using attention for explainability. 
​Gradient-based methods such as integrated gradients, 
​propagation based-methods like 
​layer-wise relevance propagation, 
​and occlusion based-methods. 
​Input saliency methods reveal 
​why one particular model prediction 
​was made in terms of how 
​relevant each input word was to that prediction. 
​This makes them much more explainable than using 
​the highly debated attention visualization. 
​Integrated gradients or IGs were introduced in 2017. 
​Integrated gradients are defined 
​as the path integral of the gradients 
​along the straight line path from 
​the baseline x prime to the input x. 
​We consider the straight line path 
​from the baseline x prime to the input 
​x and compute the gradients at 
​all possible points along the path. 
​Integrated gradients are obtained 
​by cumulating these gradients. 
​In the figure, you can see that path P2 in 
​green corresponds to that linear path 
​used by integrated gradients. 
​Here, the partial derivative of f(x) with respect to 
​x_i is the gradient of f(x) along the ith dimension. 
​In practice, when we implement integrated gradients, 
​this is the process we follow. 
​Choose a baseline. Select a baseline input 
​that represents an absence of features. 
​For example, if the input is an image, 
​the baseline could be an image 
​with all pixels set to zero. 
​Next, generate interpolated inputs. 
​Create a series of interpolated inputs between 
​the baseline x prime and the actual input x. 
​This can be done using a linear path. 
​Next, compute your gradients 
​for each interpolated input x_i, 
​compute the gradient of 
​the model's output with respect to the input. 
​This tells us how much each input 
​feature at x_i affects the output. 
​Then average the gradients. 
​Average the gradients over all the interpolated inputs. 
​This average gradient represents the contribution of 
​each feature along the path from 
​the baseline to the actual input. 
​Then scale by the input difference. 
​Multiply each average gradient by 
​the difference between the actual input and the baseline. 
​This scales the gradient contributions to 
​reflect the actual input features. 
​This figure shows attribution for 
​diabetic retinopathy grade prediction 
​from a retinal image. 
​The original image is on the left, 
​and the attributions are 
​overlaid on the original image on the right. 
​The lesions annotated in the original image do in fact 
​show up in our integrated gradient-based attributions. 
​Here are more images and 
​their integrated gradients shown in the middle column. 
​Another saliency method to consider as 
​an alternative to explainable attention is 
​layer-wise relevance propagation or 
​LRP introduced in 2019. 
​LRP is a method for 
​the decomposition of the prediction of a neural network 
​computed over a sample down to 
​the relevance scores for 
​the single input dimensions of the sample. 
​The process of LRP is straightforward. 
​Start with a forward pass to attain the output, 
​the top level relevance, 
​and then use a custom backward pass that each layer 
​redistributes the incoming relevance 
​among the inputs of that layer. 
​Relevance is redistributed until 
​we arrive at the input layers, 
​and each layer type has its own propagation rules, 
​for example, feedforward layers and LSTM layers. 
​Advantage to LRP is 
​the precise control you have over the approach. 
​Here is a heat map over 
​misclassified sentences one and two, 
​and manually constructed sentences 1A, 
​1B, 1C, 2A, 2B, and 2C. 
​The predicted class is used as 
​the target class for the visualization, 
​so words that were important to 
​the visualization can be highlighted. 
​The last saliency method we will cover in this module is 
​occlusion based-methods introduced in 2017. 
​Here, you compute input saliency by occluding or erasing, 
​input features and measuring effects on the model. 
​You can erase various parts of the representation, 
​such as input word vector dimensions, 
​intermediate hidden units, or input words. 
​This image from the original paper 
​shows the word vector dimension importance 
​for different training strategies and 
​word vectors in Word2vec and GloVe. 
​This image shows the word importance and 
​sentiment analysis for different model architectures. 
​There are other saliency methods that can be used for 
​attention-based networks beyond 
​the ones covered here today, 
​and new methods and approaches 
​are currently being researched. 
