# Feature Visualization

​We can use an approach called feature visualization 
​to visualize what is happening inside a neural network. 
​Feature visualization is the process of making 
​learned features in a neural network explicit. 
​It answers the question, 
​what does this neuron, 
​channel or layer see? 
​In this visualization from Google's article 
​Introducing the Approach in 2017, 
​we can see different feature 
​visualizations at the neuron level, 
​the channel level, and the layer level. 
​With feature visualization, we are looking 
​to maximize the activation of a neuron, 
​h, for an image, 
​the input of our network. 
​In this equation, x and y 
​refers to the spatial position of the neuron, 
​n refers to the layer, 
​and z to the channel index. 
​For the mean activation of 
​an entire channel z in layer n, 
​we perform a summation over 
​the channel as part of the equation as shown here. 
​One note is that instead of maximizing the activation, 
​you can also minimize it, 
​which is the same as maximizing 
​it in the negative direction. 
​In terms of implementation, first, 
​we create images via optimization. 
​We start with random noise. 
​To obtain meaningful visualizations, 
​we put constraints on the image, 
​like only small changes are allowed, 
​and to reduce noise in the visualization, 
​we can apply jittering, rotation, 
​or scaling of the image before optimization. 
​We can also add other regularization. 
​For example, frequency penalization 
​reduces the variance of neighboring pixels, 
​and generating images with learned priors can be used, 
​for example, using GANs or denoising autoencoders. 
​This visualization shows the process of optimization, 
​starting from random noise. 
​Starting from random noise, 
​we optimize an image to activate a particular neuron, 
​attempting to maximize it as we 
​showed in the equation on the previous slide. 
​Let's evaluate the pros and cons of 
​feature visualization as an explainable AI technique. 
​Feature visualization provides us with 
​a unique insight into how neural networks work, 
​and it allows us to communicate in 
​a non technical way how neural networks work. 
​However, it is not a complete picture of interactions. 
​For large networks, it is difficult to visualize, 
​and many feature visualization images contain 
​some abstract features that we 
​don't have a human interpretation for. 
