# Feature Attribution

​Our next explanation method is 
​commonly used in computer vision applications. 
​We have already talked about one 
​type of feature attribution, 
​occlusion or perturbation based, 
​where we manipulate parts of the image to 
​generate explanations like LIME and SHAP. 
​Here, we will introduce 
​gradient based feature attribution, 
​where we compute the gradient of the prediction or 
​classification score with respect to the input features. 
​There are many ways to calculate the gradient. 
​Saliency Maps are a feature 
​attribution method for images. 
​Here's an example of a saliency map for 
​the Duke Chapel for the predicted object class of castle. 
​There are many ways to calculate 
​the gradient of the prediction 
​or classification score with 
​respect to the input features, 
​including Vanilla Gradient or Saliency Maps, 
​which we saw on the previous slide, 
​DeconvNet and GradCAM, 
​and its variations, including 
​Guided GradCAM and SmoothGrad. 
​Today, we will cover 
​the Vanilla Gradient and GradCAM methods. 
​Vanilla Gradients provide pixel level importance, 
​where GradCam provides region level importance. 
​Before we jump into implementation 
​of the Vanilla Gradient, 
​make sure to go back and review back propagation. 
​This is a foundational topic in neural networks and is 
​a prerequisite for understanding 
​feature attribution gradient based methods. 
​In order to implement the Vanilla Gradient, 
​we calculate the gradient of the loss function for 
​the class of interest with respect to the input pixels. 
​Here's what the process looks like. 
​One, perform a forward pass of the image of interest. 
​Two, compute the gradient of the class score of 
​interest with respect to the input pixels, 
​set all other classes to zero. 
​Visualize the gradients, show absolute values 
​or highlight negative and positive contributions. 
​One challenge to note here is the saturation problem. 
​When the activation goes below zero, it gets stuck there. 
​During back propagation, 
​the gradient flowing through this neuron will be zero, 
​indicating no changes needed 
​in the weights connected to this neuron. 
​Now let's talk about GradCAM or 
​Gradient Weighted Class Activation Map. 
​GradCAM is not back 
​propagated all the way back to the image, 
​but usually to the last convolutional layer to produce 
​a localization map that 
​highlights important regions of the image. 
​The primary goal of GradCAM 
​is to understand at which parts of 
​an image a convolutional layer 
​looks for a certain classification. 
​It does this by analyzing which regions are 
​activated in the feature maps 
​of the last convolutional layers. 
​To implement GradCAM, these are the steps. 
​First, forward propagate the input image through the CNN. 
​Then obtain the raw score for the class of interest. 
​This is the activation of the neuron 
​before the softmax layer. 
​Set all other class activations to zero. 
​Then back propagate the gradient 
​of the class of interest to 
​the last convolutional layer 
​before the fully connected layers. 
​Weight each feature map or 
​pixel by the gradient for the class, 
​and calculate an average of the feature maps, 
​weighted per pixel by the gradient 
​then apply lute to the average feature map. 
​To visualize scale values to 
​the interval between 0 and 1, 
​upscale the image and overlay it over the original image. 
​If using a variation of GradCAM called Guided GradCAM, 
​you would then multiply 
​the heat map with guided back propagation. 
​Here's an example from the interpretable 
​machine learning book that 
​shows both Vanilla Gradients and GradCAM for a greyhound, 
​a bowl of soup, and an eel. 
​Let's evaluate the pros and cons of 
​feature attribution as an explainable AI technique. 
​The visuals from feature attribution 
​provide easily understandable explanations. 
​There are many methods to choose from, 
​and the computation is much 
​faster than methods like LIME or SHAP. 
​However, it is difficult to evaluate the explanation. 
​How do we know the explanation is correct? 
​It has also been shown by 
​Kindermans et al that results can be unreliable 
​and unstable in 
​feature attribution methods like Saliency Maps. 
