# Network Dissection

​[MUSIC] 
​Network dissection, introduced in 2017, 
​links human concepts with individual neural network units. 
​The key hypothesis is do convolutional neural networks learn 
​disentangled features? 
​Disentangled features just means that can individual network units detect 
​specific real world concepts? 
​This implies that the network is interpretable. 
​Spoiler alert, CNNs are in fact not perfectly disentangled. 
​Let's take a closer look. 
​The implementation of network dissection is fairly straightforward. 
​First, get images with human labeled visual concepts. 
​These could be pixel-wise labeled images with concepts of different 
​abstraction levels. 
​Second, measure CNN channel activations for images, 
​and lastly, get the alignment of activations and labeled concepts. 
​This method can be used to probe any convolutional layer. 
​Let's dive deeper into this implementation. 
​Starting with measuring the channel activations for 
​each convolutional channel k and for each image x, 
​we forward propagate image x to the target layer containing channel k and 
​then we extract the pixel activations of convolutional channel k, a sub k of x. 
​Over all images, we calculate the distribution of pixel activations 
​alpha sub k, then we determine the 0.995 quantile level t k of activations alpha k. 
​For each image x, 
​we scale the activation map a sub k of x to the resolution of image x. 
​The result is s sub k of x and then we binarize the activation map. 
​A pixel is either on or off, depending on whether or 
​not it exceeds the activation threshold t sub k. 
​The new mask is then m sub k of x is equal to s sub k of x, 
​which is greater than or equal to t sub k of x. 
​We now have one activation mask per image and channel. 
​Now let's talk about aligning activations and concepts. 
​For each channel we find the human concept that most activates that channel. 
​We compare the activation mask with all labeled concepts. 
​Then we quantify the alignment between activation mask k and 
​concept mask c with the intersection over union or IoU score. 
​Unit k is a detector of concept c when IoU of KC is greater than 0.04. 
​A reminder of our intersection of union equation is shown on the right. 
​If we look at a visual example, we have the Duke chapel, 
​the human annotated ground truth is a dashed red line. 
​The blue solid line is our top activated area. 
​The area of intersection is where these two intersect, and 
​then the area of union contains both of these areas and their intersection. 
​Let's look at some examples. 
​In this image from the original paper, 
​we can see masks of the concepts relating to dog, house, and train. 
​Another example from the original paper, 
​which shows comparisons between activations and human labeled concepts. 
​Let's evaluate the pros and 
​cons of network dissection as an explainable AI technique. 
​Network dissection expands upon insights from feature visualization and 
​communicates in a non technical way how neural networks work. 
​We can use it to link units to concepts, and 
​we can detect concepts beyond the classes in the classification task. 
​However, we need datasets that are labeled on the pixel level with the concepts. 
​This takes a lot of effort to collect. 
​Many units respond to the same concept, and some to no concept at all, 
​which can be confusing. 
​Finally, it only aligns with human concepts with positive activations, 
​not with negative activations of channels. 
