# Prototype-based Explanations

​Prototype-based explanations aim to 
​explain the predictions of 
​a black box model by identifying 
​representative examples or prototypes from the data. 
​The main thesis is that we represent 
​the model's knowledge in terms of 
​prototypical instances or patterns. 
​Let's dive into implementation. 
​For a given prediction, 
​the model selects the most 
​similar training examples or prototypes. 
​These prototypes are typically chosen based on 
​their closeness in feature space to the input instance. 
​How it does this is the model assesses 
​the similarity between 
​the input instance and various prototypes. 
​The similarity is typically 
​measured using distance measures, 
​like Euclidean distance in feature space. 
​The system then presents these prototypes to the user, 
​showing how the input instance resembles these examples. 
​Users can inspect the prototypes 
​to see common features on patterns, 
​making it easier to understand 
​why the model made a certain prediction. 
​In addition to prototypes, 
​you can use contrastive examples or criticism. 
​These are examples that are similar 
​but belong to a different class. 
​This helps users understand what 
​differentiates the predicted class from other classes. 
​Prototypes and criticisms are 
​always actual instances from our data. 
​These methods have been extended 
​to neural network explainability, 
​which we're going to talk about in 
​the explaining deep learning module. 
​One type of prototype-based explanation 
​introduced in 2016 is MMD-Critic. 
​The name comes from their use of 
​the maximum mean discrepancy, 
​MMD, two-sample statistical test. 
​The main idea behind MMD-Critic is that it selects 
​prototypes that minimize 
​the discrepancy between two distributions. 
​Data points in areas with 
​high density are good prototypes, 
​whereas data points from regions that are not well 
​explained by the prototypes are selected as criticisms. 
​Figures from the original paper show examples of 
​prototypes and criticisms for the USPS dataset. 
​As you can see, it is very easy for 
​humans to understand prototypes and criticisms, 
​even if they don't understand 
​the underlying models themselves. 
​The general approach to MMD-Critic is, first, 
​select the number of prototypes and criticisms you want, 
​find prototypes with greedy search, 
​where prototype distributions is 
​close to the data distribution, 
​and find criticisms with greedy search, 
​where criticisms equal the prototype distribution 
​differs from your data distribution. 
​Maximum mean discrepancy is 
​the measure of how different two distributions are. 
​The goal of MMD-Critic is to minimize the squared MMD. 
​Now that we understand MMD, 
​we can discuss the algorithm for finding prototypes. 
​First, you start with an empty list of prototypes. 
​Well, the number of prototypes is less than 
​the chosen number M. For each point in the dataset, 
​we check how much MMD2 is 
​reduced when the point is 
​added to the list of prototypes. 
​Add the data point that minimizes MMD to the list. 
​When that process is complete, 
​return the list of prototypes. 
​Let's evaluate the pros and cons of using 
​prototype-based explanations 
​as an explainable AI technique. 
​Prototypes themselves are concrete instances that 
​capture the essence of each class or decision boundary. 
​This aligns with human intuition. 
​They are also model agnostic. 
​However, prototype-based explanations do 
​not scale well with high dimensional data. 
​It is primarily used to provide local explanations, 
​and it is easy to overfit or underfit. 
​Finally, it is very challenging 
​to select representative prototypes. 
