# XAI in GANs

​First, a quick review of GANs. 
​GANs are a clever use of game theory, 
​essentially pitting two networks against each other. 
​You have a generator model that turns 
​random noise into synthetic images, 
​and you have a training set of actual images. 
​Both the synthetic image and an actual image from 
​the training set are fed to 
​a simple classification model, 
​the discriminator, who tries to determine 
​which images are fake and which are real. 
​The generator and the discriminator 
​models are trained together. 
​The way they are trained is zero-sum. 
​When the discriminator is correct in its prediction, 
​the generator model is penalized. 
​When the generator fools the discriminator, 
​the discriminator model is penalized. 
​At a limit, the generator generates 
​perfect replicas from the input domain every time, 
​and the discriminator cannot tell 
​the difference and predicts unsure, 
​50% for real and fake in every case. 
​The input to the generator is 
​a random noise fixed-length vector 
​sampled from a simple distribution like 
​a Gaussian or a uniform distribution. 
​This is a source of randomness that 
​the generator can use to produce diverse outputs, 
​and it usually has significantly fewer dimensions 
​than the desired output. 
​The input noise is passed through 
​a series of layers in the network, 
​which transform the noise into 
​data samples that resemble the training data. 
​These layers can be convolutional, 
​fully connected, or combinations. 
​We refer to the representations 
​learned by the model as latent space, 
​as they are intended to capture 
​the underlying distribution of the training data, 
​and our output is a synthetic data example. 
​I like to think of the generator model flow 
​in terms of embeddings. 
​First, you start with a meaningless embedding. 
​Then the generator transforms or maps this 
​meaningless embedding into an embedding 
​that represents the training data. 
​The output is an embedding that 
​corresponds to a realistic data sample. 
​Finally, the embedding is 
​decoded into data samples that ideally 
​represent real examples from 
​the training set to fool the discriminator model. 
​The discriminator model is simple. 
​It is a binary classifier trying to 
​determine whether an input image is real or fake. 
​We only use the discriminator for training 
​and it is usually discarded after training. 
​Now that we have reviewed GANs, 
​let's talk about explainability in GANs. 
​One method for explainability in 
​GANs is network dissection. 
​Bau, et al demonstrated the use of 
​network dissection methods in GANs. 
​By combining network dissection 
​with a segmentation network, 
​they were able to answer a number 
​of interesting questions. 
​Does the network learn internal neurons 
​that match meaningful concepts? 
​Do these sets of neurons merely correlate with objects, 
​or does the GAN use those neurons 
​to reason about objects? 
​Can causal neurons be 
​manipulated to improve the output of a GAN? 
​This image should look familiar. 
​If not, review the network dissection section 
​in the explaining neural networks lecture. 
​The only difference here is 
​the addition of that segmentation component. 
​You can use network dissection to 
​perform perturbations with GANs. 
​Neurons can be activated and deactivated directly. 
​This allowed the study authors to identify and 
​silence neurons that cause mistakes in image generation. 
​If you have watched the XAI in LLMs lecture, 
​you'll remember that we discussed 
​latent space dimensionality reduction 
​and visualization for explainability. 
​Well, this can also be applied to image generation. 
​Harkonen, et al applied 
​principle component analysis or PCA in 
​GAN latent space and found that it gives 
​semantically significant directions. What does that mean? 
​Well, it means that perturbing 
​inputs in these directions in certain layers of 
​GANs lead to explainable edits 
​in properties of generated images. 
​You can see this in the figure from the paper, 
​which is a 2D illustration showing 
​a principle activation direction 
​for a GAN model called BigGAN. 
​Random latent vectors are sampled 
​and converted into activations. 
​The PCA direction shown here as 
​v is computed from these samples, 
​and then PCA coordinates are computed. 
​Back in the latent space, 
​the direction u is computed by 
​regression from z_j to x_j. 
​This is a pretty cool technique 
​because it is unsupervised, 
​so you don't need labeled data like 
​many other explainability techniques. 
​Here are some images from Harkonen, et al. 
​This figure shows sequences of image edits using 
​control discovered with their method 
​on three different GAN models. 
​The initial image is on the left, 
​and various features are updated 
​using latent-space guided perturbations. 
​In this figure, rows 1 through 2 illustrate 
​the largest principal components in 
​the intermediate latent space of 
​the GAN model StyleGAN 2. 
​They span the major variations 
​expected in portrait photography, 
​including perceived gender and head rotation. 
​Shen, et al also performs 
​latent-space guided perturbations and GANs, 
​which they apply to specifically 
​edit these faces during image generation. 
​Unlike the previous method which use PCA, 
​this paper train linear models support vector machines 
​define the separation hyperplane 
​subspaces in the latent space, 
​corresponding to different binary attributes 
​like age and pose. 
​This figure shows results of manipulating 
​image generation through varying 
​the latent codes of a GAN model. 
​Each of the column shows the results 
​of manipulating a specific attribute. 
​Here's the process they used. 
​First, train independent linear SVMs on 
​labeled data to classify 
​each binary attribute in the latent space. 
​The normal vector of the SVM's decision hyperplane 
​represents the direction in 
​latent space corresponding to that attribute. 
​Then use the dot product between 
​the latent code and the attribute direction, 
​normal vector, to measure 
​how strongly that attribute is present. 
​Next, manipulate attributes by 
​moving the latent code along 
​the positive or negative direction of 
​the corresponding attribute's normal vector. 
​Finally, perform conditional 
​manipulation by subtracting out 
​projections onto other attribute directions 
​to decouple entangled attributes. 
​An illustration of this process 
​is shown here in Figure 2, 
​which shows the conditional manipulation in subspace. 
​The projection of n_1 onto n_2 is subtracted from n_1, 
​resulting in a new direction shown in black. 
​We can also integrate local explanations 
​into the train of GANs, 
​as was first demonstrated by Nagisetty in 2022. 
​They implemented saliency maps, LIME, 
​and a SHAP variation called 
​DeepSHAP into their GAN model itself, 
​which they called XAI-GAN. 
​The explanation produced by 
​these models were converted into 
​an explanation matrix M. For every feature in an example, 
​for example, an input image, 
​a value in the range of 0-1 is assigned to 
​the corresponding cell of the matrix M. If a feature, 
​more precisely the corresponding cell and M, 
​is assigned value zero or close to zero, 
​then it means that pixel had no impact 
​on the classification decision made by 
​the discriminator D. If 
​a feature is assigned a value of one or close to one, 
​that feature is very important. 
​This could be due to the feature being 
​determinative in the classification made by 
​D or when it hurts 
​the classification made by D. More precisely, 
​if the feature were to be changed, 
​then the confidence of D 
​in its classification would improve. 
​The matrix M generated by the XAI system is then used in 
​a modified gradient descent algorithm 
​to update the weights of the generator. 
​Traditionally, in a GAN, 
​the weights of the generator are 
​modified by first computing the gradient of 
​generator's output with respect 
​to the loss and then applying the chain rule. 
​The authors modify this algorithm by first computing 
​the explanation matrix M via the XAI system, 
​and then calculating the product between M and 
​the gradient of the generator output 
​with respect to the loss. 
​What this means is that the explanation matrix M 
​is used to mask the gradient function. 
​So the importance of the pixels that went 
​into the discriminator's classification are 
​taken into account in the modification of 
​the generator's weights during gradient descent. 
​One quick side note. 
​As we discuss XAI in image generation, 
​something you may see pop up in evaluations of 
​XAI techniques are image quality evaluation metrics. 
​Most commonly, the inception 
​score and the Frechet inception distance. 
​The inception score is calculated by feeding 
​the generated images through 
​a pre-trained inception model, 
​a convolutional neural network 
​used for image classification, 
​and then computing the KL divergence 
​between the marginal class distribution of 
​the generated images and 
​the conditional class distribution 
​given by the classifier. 
​Higher inception scores equal 
​better image quality and diversity. 
​The Frechet inception distance or 
​FID measures the similarity between 
​the distribution of real images and 
​the distribution of generated images in feature space. 
​The FID is calculated by computing 
​the Frechet distance between the feature representations, 
​typically obtained from an intermediate layer of 
​a pre-trained inception model 
​of the real and generated images. 
​Lower FID scores equal better similarity between 
​the distributions and higher quality generated images. 
