# XAI in LLM Challenges

​We will be using a categorization of 
​large language model explainability 
​proposed by Zhao et. al. in 2023. 
​Primarily, we will be discussing 
​XAI in fine tuning and in prompting, 
​and we'll cover many of the 
​explanation approaches shown here. 
​In addition to fine tuning and prompting, 
​we will also discuss XAI and 
​LLM knowledge augmentation or 
​retrial augmented generation or RAG. 
​It's worth discussing some of the challenges to 
​employing AI methods to large language models. 
​First, the sheer size and complexity of 
​large language models like GPT4 with 
​an unknown number of parameters likely in 
​the trillions makes tracing their reasoning intractable. 
​They learn high dimensional distributed representations 
​that are entangled and abstract. 
​There exist few or no ground truths, 
​which makes it difficult to 
​design explanation algorithms that 
​accurately reflect the decision making process of an LLM. 
​This also makes evaluating 
​explanation faithfulness and fidelity challenging. 
​The lack of transparency for many LLMs, 
​a lack of documentation 
​around model architecture, weights, 
​and data makes it 
​difficult to develop explainable approaches. 
​One note before we get started, 
​explainability in LLMs is an 
​emerging, rapidly evolving field. 
​What this means is that this material 
​may be outdated in six months. 
​I hope to continue updating 
​this course as new research is published. 
​However, I caution you that this is not 
​the source of all truth in explainable LLMs. 
​It is merely a timestamp 
​of the current progress in the field. 
​As part of your continued education in XAI, 
​I encourage you to read 
​the latest papers and stay up to date with 
​the shifting mindsets and perspectives on XAI in LLMs. 
