# XAI in LLM Fine-tuning

​Let's begin by reviewing fine-tuning. 
​In LLM, fine-tuning a large base model, typically which has greater than 1 
​billion parameters, that is trained on a corpus of unlabeled data, 
​is fine-tuned on a smaller dataset with labels or 
​through reinforcement learning with human feedback or RLHF. 
​This can be visualized by this figure. 
​We have a large-scale text corpus that is used for 
​unsupervised pre-training of a base model LLAMA-2. 
​Base models are usually not very good at producing adequate responses. 
​It is usually necessary to do some kind of fine tuning in order to have a model 
​that provides useful results. 
​To do this with the base model, we perform supervised fine-tuning and or 
​reinforcement learning with human feedback with a smaller fine-tuning data set 
​to create our assistant model like LLAMA-2 chat. 
​We can break down explanations in LLM fine-tuning into local and 
​global explanations, 
​where local explanations explain a specific prediction or set of predictions. 
​And global explanations attempt to provide a global explanation of the model. 
​Local explanations we will discuss include feature attribution, attention-based 
​explanation, example-based explanation, and natural language explanation. 
​Global explanations we will discuss include probing-based explanation, 
​neuron activation explanation, and concept-based explanation. 
​If you plan to take the explainable machine learning course in 
​this specialization, we will cover many of these explanation approaches. 
​This figure from Chao et al is a fantastic breakdown of our local explanations. 
​Let's dive into the details. 
​There are currently four primary feature attribution approaches 
​to explainability in LLMs. 
​First, perturbation-based explanation. 
​This is where you perturb input examples by removing, 
​masking or altering input features. 
​This can be embedding vectors, hidden units, words, or 
​tokens, and then you evaluate model output changes. 
​Next is a gradient-based explanation. 
​This is where you determine the importance of each input feature by analyzing 
​the partial derivatives of the output with respect to each input dimension. 
​The magnitude of the derivatives reflects the sensitivity of the output to 
​changes in the input. 
​Integrated gradients are the primary approach to gradient-based explanation 
​in LLMs. 
​Next is SHAP, we briefly discussed SHAP in an overview of XAI methods, Chen et al. 
​And others adapted SHAP to transformer-based language models in 2023. 
​Trans SHAP mainly focuses on adapting SHAP to sub-word text input and 
​providing sequential visualization explanations. 
​Finally, decomposition-based methods decomposition techniques aim to break down 
​the relevance score into linear contributions from the input. 
​An example of this is layer wise relevance propagation or LRP. 
​The next local explanation for LLM fine-tuning is example-based explanation. 
​Counterfactual explanations reveal what would have happened based on certain 
​observed input changes. 
​Influential instances characterize the influence of individual training samples 
​by measuring how much they affect the loss on test points. 
​Topics we will cover today include adversarial examples and 
​natural language explanations. 
​Neural models are highly vulnerable to carefully crafted small modifications in 
​the input data that can drastically alter the model's predictions, 
​despite being nearly imperceptible to humans. 
​These are called adversarial examples. 
​Adversarial examples expose areas where models fail and 
​are used during training to improve model robustness and accuracy. 
​Early adversarial example generation focused on word-level manipulations like 
​errors, removals, and insertions. 
​More advanced methods like TextFooler from Jin et al. 
​In 2020, strategically perturb important words-based on word embeddings and 
​semantic similarity. 
​State-of-the-art approaches to adversarial examples in large language 
​models leverage masked language models and adopt a mask, then infill procedure for 
​token-level perturbations like replacement insertion and merging. 
​A recent method called SemAttack and Wong et al 2022, proposes a more 
​general framework operating directly on embedding spaces like knowledge and 
​contextualized semantics. 
​It iteratively optimizes perturbed embeddings to meet attack goals. 
​A visualization of some attack is shown here in table one. 
​Replacing a blue word with a red adversarial one misleads the correct 
​prediction to a wrong class while not fooling a human. 
​The last local explanation we will discuss is natural language explanation. 
​This is where we explain a model's decision-making on an input sequence 
​with generated text. 
​The approach is to train a language model using both original textual data and 
​human-annotated explanations. 
​Recently, this has been done for a variety of datasets and tasks, 
​as shown here in the table from Low et al. 
​A paper in 2019 introduced the common sense explanations or COS dataset. 
​And used it to train language models to automatically generate explanations that 
​can be used during training and inference. 
​Similarly, a more recent study in 2022 looked at few shot out of domain 
​transfer learning of natural language explanations from a parent task 
​with many natural language explanations to a child task. 
​Let's now discuss global explanations. 
​Concept-based explanations allow us to map the inputs to a set of concepts and 
​measure important scores of each predefined concept to model predictions. 
​Testing concept activation vectors is an example of this. 
​Two global explanation used in explainable LLM 
​in fine-tuning probing-based explanations, and 
​neuron activation explanations will be the topics we will cover in more detail. 
​In probing-based explanation, 
​we can look at either classifier-based probing or parameter-free probing. 
​In classifier-based probing, the process is first, 
​freeze LLM parameters, then generate representations from the LLM. 
​Next, train a shallow classifier on those representations to predict linguistic 
​properties. 
​If you are probing for syntax, you are looking at things like parts of speech, 
​morphology, or dependencies. 
​Alternatively, if you are probing for semantics, you are examining coreferences, 
​entities, and relations. 
​Parameter-free probing evaluates an LLM directly on tailored 
​datasets without a classifier. 
​It's important to note that, like many of these approaches, 
​probing validity is debated by researchers. 
​High performance may not mean true linguistic understanding by LLMs. 
​Neuron activation analysis examines individual neurons or 
​dimensions rather than the whole vector space. 
​It involves two steps, one identifying important neurons and 
​two learning relations between linguistic properties and neurons. 
​The lack of ground truth annotations makes evaluating component-level 
​explanations challenging. 
​This figure shows an example of neuron activation explanation, which looks 
​at the activation visualization of the 131st neuron in the fifth layer of GPT-2. 
​The process of neuron activation explanation is shown here. 
​First, identify important neurons in an unsupervised manner. 
​This involves ranking neurons based on metrics like correlation measurements, 
​learned weights, or using supervised classification methods. 
​Next, learn relations between linguistic properties and 
​the individual ranked neurons in supervised tasks. 
​Then, verify the importance of the ranked neurons quantitatively via ablation 
​experiments like masking and erasure. 
​With LLMs generate natural language explanations that summarize 
​the patterns in text that trigger high activation for a given neuron. 
​Finally, evaluate the quality of the natural 
​language explanations by testing how well they allow the model 
​to simulate the real neurons activation behavior on new test examples. 
