# XAI in LLM Prompting

​Let's begin by reviewing 
​prompting of large language models. 
​Prompting involves strategically designing 
​task-specific instructions in natural language 
​to guide model output without altering parameters. 
​Prompt engineering includes instruction, context, 
​and user input, which is used to guide 
​the output of the pre-trained large language model. 
​There are many different prompting methodologies, 
​with some of them outlined in this figure from 
​a 2024 paper from Sahoo et al. 
​In the context of explainability, 
​we will discuss two types of prompting: 
​in-context learning and chain of thought. 
​In-context learning is when a model is 
​shown task demonstrations as part of the prompt. 
​Chain of thought, or COT, 
​involves prompting the model to describe 
​its reasoning and go step by step through a problem. 
​When we think about explainability 
​of in-context learning, 
​the question we are trying to answer is, 
​how does in-context learning influence model behavior? 
​To answer this question, 
​recent research has relied on contrastive demonstrations, 
​perturbations of input text, 
​flip labels, and using semantically unrelated labels. 
​Liu et al., in 2023, 
​uses the SST-2 sentiment analysis benchmark as 
​a baseline task to explain ICL 
​by investigating how ICL works in LLMs, 
​by analyzing contrastive demonstrations 
​and saliency maps. 
​The authors build contrastive demonstrations 
​by flipping labels, 
​perturbing input text, 
​and adding complementary explanations. 
​Here, you can see prompt 
​with label flipping in the demonstrations. 
​Here, you can see prompt with 
​input perturbation and 
​prompt with complementary explanations. 
​Wei et al. 2023 explains how 
​ICL is affected by semantic priors versus 
​input label mappings by investigating two setups: 
​ICL with flipped labels and 
​ICL with semantically unrelated labels. 
​This figure shows an overview of remapped inputs, 
​where words are remapped to other words 
​to reduce the semantic meaningfulness of inputs. 
​We ask a similar question when we think 
​about explainability of chain of thought prompting. 
​How does chain of thought, or COT, 
​prompting affect the behavior of large language models? 
​To answer this question, recent research has explored 
​saliency scores, perturbations, and counterfactuals. 
​This figure shows the structure of a typical chain of 
​thought prompt with the question Q, thought T, 
​and answer A. Wu et al., 
​in 2023, analyze 
​the saliency scores of the input tokens. 
​Here, saliency scores indicate how 
​influential each input token is on the model's output. 
​The goal is to understand whether chain of thought 
​prompting changes saliency scores 
​compared to standard prompting, 
​or why does chain of thought improve performance. 
​Two 2022 papers perturb chain 
​of thought demonstrations in few shot prompts 
​by adding errors to determine 
​which aspects are important 
​for generating good explanations. 
​One of these papers from Madonna et al. 
​also proposes counterfactual prompts 
​to perturb key components of a prompt, 
​like symbols, patterns, and texts. 
​Uncertainty poses a significant challenge 
​for current large language models. 
​Despite their impressive capabilities 
​in generating human-like text, 
​large language models can exhibit overconfidence 
​and provide responses with a high degree of certainty, 
​even when their training data is incomplete or ambiguous. 
​This lack of uncertainty quantification 
​can lead to potential risks such as 
​propagating misinformation or making 
​critical decisions based on unreliable outputs. 
​Addressing this issue is crucial for building 
​trustworthy and reliable AI systems, 
​particularly in high-stakes domains like 
​healthcare, finance, and decision-making. 
​Consistency based on uncertainty estimation, 
​as posited by Xiong et al. 
​in their 2024 paper, 
​involves generating multiple responses 
​to a question and using 
​the consistency between these responses 
​to estimate the model's confidence. 
​They do this by introducing randomness into 
​the answer generation process, self-consistency, 
​or adding misleading hints to the prompt, 
​induced consistency to produce varied responses. 
​The idea is that if 
​a fine-tuned LM is more 
​consistent across multiple responses, 
​then it has higher estimated confidence in the answer. 
​Another paper by Duan et al. 
​looks at token-level uncertainty. 
​Here's the main concept: 
​LLMs generate texts by predicting each token, 
​token-level uncertainty methods calculate 
​a confidence score for 
​each predicted token based 
​on its probability distribution, 
​and the overall uncertainty can be estimated 
​based on the aggregation of token-level uncertainties. 
​Now, you may be asking, 
​can we just ask an LLM to 
​tell us how confident it is in the answer? 
​The answer is probably not. 
​Well, there are research frameworks being 
​proposed like the one by Li et al. 
​in 2024. For having an LLM 
​justify its confidence rather than 
​the naive approach of simply 
​asking an LLM to give its confidence, 
​there are a few things to consider. 
​Current LLMs hallucinate frequently and don't 
​know what they don't know or 
​what is outside their training data. 
​They are highly likely to just make something up. 
​It's also difficult to math 
​this confidence to anything real. 
​While this may be an interesting approach to try to 
​understand how confident a model 
​thinks it is in an answer, 
​it is not an explainable AI approach. 
