# XAI in Knowledge Augmentation (RAG)

​As we jump into XAI and LLM knowledge augmentation, 
​we have to first define knowledge augmentation. 
​We are going to talk about a specific type of 
​knowledge augmentation called 
​retrieval-augmented generation or RAG. 
​RAG is how most customized chatbot works, 
​like the CIONIC chatbot shown on the right screenshot. 
​It has applications in search, 
​as you can see here in the Rent 
​the Runway AI search feature 
​shown on the screenshot on the bottom of this slide. 
​It is also the basis of 
​OpenAI's assistant if you have used that API. 
​We are going to first define RAG, 
​discuss its application for XAI, 
​then explore XAI in RAG. 
​This is the pipeline for retrieval-augmented generation. 
​We are going to break down each of these components. 
​Let's take a step back and review embeddings. 
​As we discussed at the beginning of this module, 
​we convert human understandable information like 
​language and images into 
​numbers that a machine can understand. 
​One way to do this is to take a lot of data and find 
​when similar concepts are close 
​together semantically and contextually. 
​For example, the word bank and bank of the river 
​should be close semantically to shore and riverside, 
​given the context of river. 
​The word bank in deposited money at the bank 
​should be semantically closer to financial institution, 
​given the context of money and bank. 
​We basically want to take 
​these concepts and squeeze them into 
​a fixed length vector or series of 
​numbers that represents all of this information. 
​Embeddings are a method of converting 
​textual information into vectors of real numbers, 
​capturing semantic and syntactic aspects of the data. 
​They capture semantic relationships, 
​making it possible for words with 
​similar meanings to have similar representations. 
​Key features of embeddings 
​include dimensionality reduction. 
​It reduces the complexity of data. 
​It captures semantics. 
​It encodes meaning based on 
​word usage and context, and distance measures. 
​You can use similarity and meaning. 
​It often correlates with proximity in vector space. 
​Embeddings are mapped into 
​a multidimensional space that 
​we call embedding or latent space. 
​In this image, you can see a multimodal embedding space, 
​where captions from a large dataset of images were 
​embedded with a multimodal embedding model called CLIP, 
​and visualized using a method called UMAP, 
​which we will cover later on. 
​It's interesting to note the human labeled clusters of 
​concepts like people and 
​clothes on the right side of the image, 
​housing on the bottom, places on the right, 
​and art and animals near the top. 
​A few concepts from 12 million captions 
​embedded include kitchens and dining rooms, 
​which are close together in 
​multidimensional embedding space. 
​The first concept of our RAG pipeline 
​utilizes embeddings. 
​A vector database is where vector embeddings are stored. 
​You typically take a bunch of 
​unstructured data like PDFs, images, or videos, 
​and embed some portion of that data using 
​an embedding model that 
​transforms data into vector embeddings. 
​Here I am using an example from Rent the Runway, 
​where each item in their fashion database 
​is embedded as a vector. 
​One thing to note here is that the embedding model 
​determines your vector length or a number of dimensions. 
​For example, OpenAI's ADA 002 embedding model 
​had a vector length of 1536. 
​The next component of our RAG pipeline 
​also uses embeddings. 
​When the user asks a question, 
​the text is transformed into a vector embedding, 
​the same embedding model you 
​use to create your vector database. 
​For example, if my user query is black leather boots, 
​then that query will be embedded 
​using my embedding model, 
​and I will have a vector embedding 
​that represents that query. 
​Now I connect the pieces. 
​I match the user query embedding to 
​my vector database using a similarity algorithm. 
​A similarity algorithm is used to find 
​closest matches to the user query in the vector database. 
​You can use any distance metric here, 
​such as Euclidean distance. 
​However, most people building 
​RAG pipelines use cosine similarity. 
​Cosine similarity is scale-invariant, 
​so it can measure the similarity of 
​vectors regardless of the magnitude. 
​It's more suitable for high dimensional spaces due to 
​its focus on an angle rather than an absolute distance, 
​which can be affected by the curse of dimensionality. 
​It is interpretable because values are 
​bounded between negative one and one. 
​Now, all we have to do is add a large language model back 
​into the loop to do the generation part 
​of our RAG pipeline. 
​To recap RAG, you have 
​a vector database that is 
​created by embedding your unstructured data. 
​You have a user query that is also embedded using 
​the same embedding model as 
​the one used to create your vector database. 
​You use a similarity algorithm to find 
​the closest matches between items in 
​your vector database and your user query. 
​The closest matches are then incorporated 
​into your prompt and sent to the LLM. 
​The LLM generates a response to the user's query, 
​and this response is sent back to the user. 
​This is, of course, a very simple example. 
​Some RAG pipelines have a more agentic structure 
​with an LLM in the loop making explicit decisions, 
​some have multiple databases, 
​and some have reranking 
​algorithms or algorithms to rerank 
​your similarity algorithm results to 
​improve the matches fed into 
​the generative part of that LLM. 
​While not inherently explainable AI, 
​this source grounding we get with RAG gives users 
​insights into the knowledge base 
​powering the LLM responses. 
​It allows them to verify the factual accuracy, 
​understanding the model's reasoning process, 
​and gain confidence that the generations are grounded in 
​real world data rather than in pure hallucination. 
​This transparency can foster trust and make 
​the powerful capabilities of 
​LLMs more accessible and actionable. 
​At this point, you may be thinking, 
​what are ways in which we can improve 
​explainability of the RAG system itself? 
​One way is by making 
​embedding spaces more explainable through visualization. 
​We already saw an example of this on the embedding slide, 
​where I showed the visualization of 
​the image captions embedded using CLIP. 
​Before we jump into visualizing 
​latent space, a quick review. 
​We are familiar with a simple plot where we 
​can take a point and map it into space. 
​The point has two dimensions, x and y. 
​Perhaps we can imagine a 3D plot, like the one here, 
​where we can plot a point with 
​three dimensions, x, y, and z. 
​Now imagine plotting a vector 
​with 1,000 or more dimensions. 
​This multidimensional space onto which 
​concepts are mapped is called embedding or latent space. 
​The interesting thing about a 
​latent space is that we can map 
​different information sources like text 
​and images to the same latent space, 
​as long as we have a dataset that connects them together, 
​like a large dataset of 
​images and captions from the Internet. 
​However, if it is hard for us 
​to understand relationships in three dimensions, 
​like this plot I'm showing here, 
​imagine how difficult it is for us to comprehend 
​semantic and contextual relationships 
​between complex concepts and multimodal data. 
​How do we go about visualizing the latent space? 
​With so many dimensions, 
​can we make any meaningful 
​interpretations of the latent space? 
​There are a few methods that are 
​typically used for dimensionality reduction 
​and visualization that we 
​harness for visualizing embeddings. 
​These are t-SNE projections, PCA, and UMAPs. 
​Let's go through a brief summary of each of 
​these approaches to visualizing latent space. 
​You'll get to explore these in 
​a reading and follow-up discussion, 
​which will be an exploration using 
​project tensor flows embedding projector. 
​First, principal component analysis or PCA. 
​The focus is on capturing 
​global linear relationships in the data. 
​You should use PCA to simplify and find 
​global linear relationships and patterns in the data. 
​Next, t-distributed 
​stochastic neighbor embedding or t-SNE. 
​This involves constructing 
​a lower dimensional representation 
​where similar data points are placed closer together. 
​You should use t-SNE to emphasize visualization, 
​reveal local patterns and clusters. 
​Uniform manifold approximation and projection or UMAP. 
​UMAP uses manifold learning and 
​non-linear dimensionality reduction technique to 
​understand the underlying structure or shape of the data. 
​It focuses on capturing 
​complex non-linear relationships in the data. 
​You should use UMAP to preserve local structure and 
​handle complex non-linear relationships. 
