# Accumulated Local Effects (ALE) Plots

​When we discussed the limitations of 
​partial dependence plots or PDPs, 
​we found that PDPs do not have 
​clear interpretations when features are correlated. 
​In real life, features are usually correlated 
​or relationships between features 
​are not well understood. 
​This is why accumulated local effects 
​or ALE plots were introduced in 2020. 
​ALE plots include local effects and accumulation. 
​ALE plots focus on 
​local changes in the prediction when a feature value 
​changes unlike PDPs which 
​average out the effects over the entire feature space. 
​Instead of plotting the local effects directly, 
​ALE plots accumulate these effects 
​across the range of the feature. 
​This helps in understanding the global trend 
​of how the feature influences predictions. 
​Here are a few examples of 
​ALE plots from the original paper. 
​They're exploring the effects of features, month, 
​hour, weather, and wind speed on bike sharing. 
​To create an ALE plot, we're going to follow 
​the following steps, bin the feature. 
​So we divide the feature of interest 
​into several intervals or bins. 
​These bins help in managing the data and computing 
​local effects within smaller, more manageable segments. 
​Next, compute local effects. 
​For each bin, calculate 
​the local effect of the feature on the prediction. 
​This involves calculating the change in 
​prediction when moving from the 
​lower to the upper edge of the bin, 
​averaging this change over all instances that fall into 
​that bin and accumulate effects. 
​Starting from the first bin, accumulate 
​the local effects across all bins. 
​Sum up the average effects sequentially, 
​just show how the feature influences the prediction as 
​the value changes and centering. 
​To make the plot more interpretable, 
​center the accumulated effects around zero. 
​Subtract the mean of accumulated effects which forces 
​the interpretation to focus on 
​deviations from the average prediction. 
​This plot compares PDPs and ALE plots. 
​In this case, the PDP estimates 
​are influenced by the odd behavior of 
​the model outside of 
​the data distribution which is 
​visualized in the steep jumps in the plots. 
​By contrast, the ALE plots correctly identified 
​the linear relationship between 
​the features and the prediction. 
​Now, let's evaluate the pros and cons of 
​ALE plots as an explainable ALE technique. 
​ALE plots are unbiased and 
​work even when features are correlated. 
​They allow for clear interpretation and 
​are faster to compute than PDPs. 
​However, when features are very highly correlated, 
​ALE and linear coefficients have been shown to not match. 
​This is not a perfect solution 
​for highly correlated features. 
​Additionally, the implementation of ALE plots is more 
​complex and less intuitive than PDPs. 
