# Concept Activation Vectors

​Concept activation vectors or a numerical representation 
​of a concept in the activation space 
​of a neural network layer. 
​Testing with concept activation vectors or 
​TCAV was first introduced in 2018. 
​For any given concept, 
​TCAV measures the extent of 
​that concept's influence on 
​the model's prediction for a certain class. 
​We are going to walk through the implementation of 
​TCAV with an example, classification of zebras. 
​First, curate datasets, a concept dataset that 
​represents concept C and A random dataset. 
​Here, on the right, you see the target 
​dataset and a random data set. 
​On the left, you see three different concepts, 
​striped, zigzagged, and dotted. 
​Next, target a hidden layer L, 
​and train a binary classifier 
​which separates the activations 
​generated by the concept set 
​from those generated by the random set. 
​The binary classifier can be 
​an SVM or logistic regression model. 
​The coefficient vector of 
​this trained binary classifier 
​is the concept activation vector. 
​Given an image input x, 
​we can measure its conceptual sensitivity 
​by calculating the directional derivative 
​of the prediction in the direction of 
​the unit concept activation vector as shown here. 
​This component maps the activation vector 
​to the logic output of class k, 
​and this component maps the input x to 
​the activation vector of layer L. We 
​calculate the ratio of inputs with 
​positive conceptual sensitivities to 
​the number of inputs for each class. 
​Now, how do we know if 
​our concept activation vector is robust? 
​Instead of training only one concept activation vector, 
​we train multiple using different random datasets, 
​while keeping the concept dataset the same. 
​A meaningful concept will generate 
​concept activation vectors with consistent TCAV scores. 
​Here are the steps, collect N random datasets. 
​The recommendation from the paper 
​is N is greater than or equal to 10. 
​Then fix the concept dataset and calculate 
​your TCAV score using each of the N random datasets. 
​Next, apply a two sided T-test to 
​N TCAV scores against other N TCAV scores, 
​generated by a random concept activation vector. 
​A random concept activation vector can be obtained by 
​choosing a random dataset as the concept dataset. 
​Use multiple hypothesis correction, 
​like Bonferroni multiple hypothesis correction 
​for your hypothesis testing. 
​Here, we look at the class zebra, 
​and the concepts dotted, striped and zigzagged. 
​We are exploring a layer called 
​mixed four C. You can see on the right, 
​the TCAV score for 
​each concept is displayed on a bar chart. 
​As one might expect, the TCAV scores are high for 
​concepts striped and zigzagged for the zebra class, 
​but very low for the concept dotted. 
​Let's evaluate the pros and cons of 
​concept activation vectors as 
​an explainable AI technique. 
​TCAV is customizable via concept dataset creation, 
​and it provides great global explanations. 
​However, there are some caveats. 
​It performs poorly on shallow neural networks this is 
​because concepts in deeper layers 
​have been shown to be more separable. 
​TCAV requires additional annotations 
​to the dataset, which can be costly. 
​Finally, TCAV is primarily used for image data only. 
