# Visualizing Attention

​[MUSIC] 
​Explainable attention is a relatively new concept. 
​Research on approaches, limitations, and 
​criticisms of the approach are still emerging. 
​As with all of the topics in explainable AI, we should maintain a critical 
​perspective and ensure that we are using the approaches for the right reasons and 
​that the theory behind the concepts are robust. 
​In this section, I will share the latest research on approaches, 
​limitations, and criticisms. 
​Over the years, visualizing attention has been a topic of great debate. 
​From heat map visualizations, shown here from a 2015 paper, to graph and 
​matrix attention representations, shown here from a paper in 2018. 
​There has been a lot of debate around the best way to visualize attention and 
​whether we should be doing it at all. 
​Perhaps the most commonly used method for visualizing attention, and likely the one 
​that you have seen used in explanatory articles, is BertViz introduced in 2019. 
​It visualizes attention in the transformer architecture at multiple scales. 
​Bertviz extracts the attention weights or scores from each layer and 
​head of the transformer for a given input. 
​It's important to note that BertViz is a tool for visualizing transformers, and 
​is not limited to the Bert family of models. 
​Here you can see some visualizations from BertViz where higher weights between 
​tokens are shown in darker colors. 
​As you can see, you can probe different layers in your network using BertViz. 
​This shows a couple other ways we can use BertViz to visualize attention patterns, 
​a whole model view on the left and a neuron view of GPT-2 shown on the right. 
​The original paper suggested that this visualization method could be used to 
​detect biases like proposed encoded gender bias shown here in figure four. 
​From the original paper. 
