# Interpretable Attention: The Debate

​Like I mentioned previously, 
​using attention as a proxy for interpretability 
​or explainability is a topic 
​of great debate in the community. 
​There have been several papers showing that 
​visualizations of attention can be grossly incorrect. 
​Even the BertViz repository 
​itself has been updated to read 
​visualizing attention weights illuminates 
​one type of architecture within the model, 
​but does not necessarily provide 
​a direct explanation for predictions. 
​If you wish to understand how the input text influences 
​output predictions more directly, 
​consider saliency methods. 
​In 2019, Jane & Wallace came out with 
​a paper entitled attention is not explanation. 
​Heightening the debate, 
​Wiegreffe & Pinter fired back with another paper 
​later in 2019 attention is not not explanation. 
​This debate became the elephant in 
​the room in the explainable AI community, 
​it also became a paper. 
​This paper to be specific, 
​a paper released in 2020 by 
​Google research titled the elephant 
​in the interpretability room. 
​Why use attention as 
​explanations when we have saliency methods? 
​Shared the following rationale for why we 
​should not be using attention for explainability. 
​The goal of the explanation is to reveal 
​which input words are 
​the most important ones for the final prediction. 
​According to a 2019 paper, 
​attention is often uncorrelated 
​with gradient based feature importance measures. 
​Another paper showed that a completely different set of 
​attention weights that results in 
​the same prediction can usually be found. 
​Another analysis published in 
​2019 described that when modifying attention weights, 
​they often do not identify those representations 
​that are most important to the prediction of the model. 
​A 2020 paper concluded that one cannot intervene on 
​attention while keeping 
​all the other variables in variant. 
​As this debate continues, 
​it is important to acknowledge all of 
​the limitations of using attention for AI. 
​What about some alternatives? 
