# A Good Decision

​The rationale for explainable AI 
​can be represented by this quote from Plato. 
​A good decision is based on knowledge and not on numbers. 
​What do I mean by this? We can 
​plot ice cream sales by month, 
​and we can also plot shark attacks by month. 
​When you look at these plots, you may ask the question, 
​does eating ice cream cause shark attacks? 
​From a purely numeric perspective, 
​these two seem to be quite correlated with one another. 
​You might conclude that eating 
​ice cream does cause shark attacks., 
​but when drawing this conclusion, 
​we are ignoring our knowledge. 
​Specifically, our knowledge about 
​seasonal temperature fluctuations and 
​their impacts on both people eating 
​ice cream and people entering the ocean. 
​Our conclusion then is quite different. 
​While these two events are correlated, 
​we know one does not cause the other. 
​Similarly, when we trained a neural network to 
​classify an image as 
​a husky or a wolf as shown in this figure, 
​for example, we may achieve 
​very high accuracy and not question the results. 
​However, if we look at 
​simply accuracy metrics or numbers, 
​we're ignoring the reasoning or 
​knowledge behind the classification 
​decision made by the model. 
​If we don't dig deeper 
​into understanding the model results, 
​we would be unaware that 
​the model was making this decision 
​solely based on the background of the image. 
​Specifically, whether or not 
​there was snow on the ground. 
​Similarly, we can take a look at the water birds dataset, 
​which has images of land birds with land backgrounds, 
​and images of water birds with water backgrounds. 
​This is what is used to train the model. 
​Now let's say we want to test our model, 
​but we want to test it on 
​land birds on water backgrounds, 
​and water birds on land backgrounds. 
​I'm sure you see where this is going. 
​Our model accurately classifies 
​land birds and water birds in our first column, 
​but doesn't predict a single bird 
​correctly in our second column. 
​The authors of this recent paper 
​used visualization methods to 
​look at what part of the image 
​the model was using to make the prediction. 
​They found that, in fact, 
​the background being land or water is 
​what the model was using rather than the bird itself. 
​In another recent paper, 
​the authors tried to understand 
​misclassifications in dermatology modeling. 
​The authors used an approach to 
​explain the model predictions and found that 
​the presence of certain pigmentation 
​or hair caused the misclassifications. 
​This can be very beneficial to understanding 
​the model's behavior and how to make 
​decisions based off of its predictions. 
