# LIME

​Local interpretable model-agnostic explanations 
​or LIME were introduced in 2016. 
​They use interpretable models to explain 
​individual predictions of 
​a black box machine learning model. 
​An advantage to using LIME is 
​that it can be used for many data sources, 
​including tabular data, text, and images. 
​The idea behind LIME is illustrated in 
​this figure from the original paper introducing LIME. 
​You have some black box model and you have 
​a prediction instance and 
​the corresponding data or 
​features used to get that prediction. 
​We can use LIME to show the features 
​that most contribute to our prediction, 
​which can help humans make 
​a more informed decision about 
​whether to trust the prediction of the model. 
​Let's dive into how this works. 
​Here, you can see a toy example used in 
​the original paper to present intuition for LIME. 
​The decision function of the original black box model is 
​illustrated by the complex curve 
​shown in the blue and pink background. 
​The bold red cross is 
​our prediction instance of interest. 
​What LIME posits is that 
​while the complex decision function 
​of the original model cannot be 
​approximated with a linear model, 
​we can use a linear model to approximate 
​the decision function at this local area of interest. 
​We can do this by sampling 
​instances around our area of interest and 
​using those to train 
​a new interpretable model like a linear regression model. 
​Let's look at the process next. 
​First, you select an instance of interest. 
​This is a prediction that you would like to explain. 
​Next, you perturb your dataset and 
​get black box predictions for perturbed samples. 
​From this, you generate a new dataset that consists of 
​these perturbed samples or variations of 
​your data and the corresponding predictions. 
​Now you can train an interpretable model and you weight 
​those sampled instances by 
​their proximity to the instance of interest. 
​Now you have an interpretable local model 
​that can be used to explain your prediction. 
​A reminder that this is a 
​local explainable technique that 
​should be used only for 
​the instance or prediction of interest. 
​It is not a globally faithful explanation 
​and it won't generalize to 
​other predictions made by your model. 
​If we take a look at the math, 
​the explanation model for instance x, for example, 
​a linear regression model, 
​is that model minimizes the loss L, 
​which could be any defined loss. 
​For example, mean squared error. 
​This loss measures how close 
​the explanation is to 
​the prediction of the original model. 
​Pi is a proximity, 
​which is a measure of how 
​large of the neighborhood around 
​instance x is that we consider for the explanation. 
​G is the family of 
​all possible explanations or 
​all possible linear regression models. 
​We try to keep the model complexity, 
​denoted here with Omega low, 
​which means we prefer fewer features. 
​This is based on the principle of Accam's Razor. 
​Accam's Razor states that if you have 
​two competing ideas to explain the same phenomenon, 
​you should prefer the simpler one. 
​For example, you hear a sound in 
​the middle of the night and form two hypotheses. 
​First is that your cat knocked something off the table. 
​The second is that aliens landed 
​on your roof and are now invading your house. 
​The simpler of the two hypotheses 
​is that your cat knocked something off the table. 
​So that is the one you should 
​prefer according to Accam's Razor. 
​In the context of AI, 
​if you have two AI models that 
​perform similarly on your evaluation criteria, 
​you should prefer the simpler, more interpretable one. 
​When we consider the practical 
​application of this equation, 
​LIME typically is only optimizing the loss component. 
​The user is responsible for determining the complexity by 
​selecting the maximum number of 
​features that the linear regression model may use. 
​Let's look at LIME in practice. 
​When using LIME for text, 
​we create variations of instances 
​by randomly removing words from the original text. 
​The dataset can be represented 
​with binary features for each word, 
​where feature equals one if 
​the corresponding word is included 
​and feature equals zero if 
​the corresponding word has been removed. 
​In the image shown here from 
​the interpretable machine learning book, 
​we can see an example where each word is removed from 
​the original text and used to 
​develop our interpretable linear model, 
​which can then be used to determine 
​the importance of features or words in 
​the prediction of a simple 
​YouTube video comment classification 
​of spam or not spam. 
​The first line shows a variation of the dataset, 
​where the words Christmas, 
​my, and channel are removed. 
​It looks like the word channel has 
​a high probability of being 
​included in a prediction for spam comments. 
​Using LIME for images is really interesting. 
​Image variations are created by segmenting the image 
​into super pixels or interconnected pixels with 
​similar colors and then turning them on or 
​off by replacing each pixel 
​with a user defined color like gray. 
​The user is also able to specify 
​a probability for turning off 
​a super pixel at each permutation. 
​In these figures from the original LIME paper, 
​you can see examples of LIME in practice. 
​In the bottom figure, 
​different superpixels are highlighted to 
​show the top classes used to predict electric guitar, 
​acoustic guitar, and labrador. 
​The top figure shows 
​the original image and the explanation of 
​a bad model's prediction in a task 
​classifying between husky and wolf. 
​You can see here that the model only picked 
​up some snow in the background to make its prediction, 
​which is not desired since we would like the model to use 
​characteristics of the animal in the picture to 
​determine whether it is a husky or a wolf. 
​Perhaps the most intuitive way that we may 
​consider LIME is using it for tableular data. 
​LIME can be used for tableular data to 
​determine importance of features 
​as shown in the figure here, 
​which shows that for one instance, 
​temperature and weather had 
​positive effects on the prediction for bike rental. 
​In another instance shown in the bottom, 
​the temperature and season had 
​a negative effect for the prediction for bike rental. 
​However, there is significant limitation 
​of LIME when using tabular data. 
​In tabular data, LIME samples 
​are not taken around the instance of interest, 
​but rather from the training data's mass center. 
​You can see this visualized with 
​this image from the interpretable machine learning book. 
​We are predicting classes 
​represented by the blue and gray areas. 
​The instance of interest is that bright yellow dot. 
​Data sampled from a normal distribution 
​is shown in B and C, 
​assigns a higher weight to 
​points near the instance of interest. 
​However, you can see that 
​this definition of the neighborhood around 
​a point can really impact the results of our local model. 
​The current Python implementation of 
​LIME uses an exponential smoothing kernel. 
​Reminder that a smoothing kernel is a function that 
​takes two data instances and returns a proximity measure. 
​The kernel width determines how 
​large the neighborhood of instances is. 
​A small kernel width means that an instance 
​must be very close to influence our local model. 
​Whereas a larger kernel width means 
​that instances that are farther 
​away also influence the model. 
​There is not yet a robust way 
​to find the best kernel width 
​and this problem gets much 
​worse in higher dimensional feature spaces. 
​Let's evaluate the pros and cons of 
​LIME as an explainable AI technique. 
​LIME is flexible. 
​If you replace your machine learning model 
​because it is model agnostic, 
​you can still use LIME. 
​LIME is also intuitive and 
​it can work for different data sources. 
​There are limitations and challenges with using LIME. 
​First, there are limitations in how to define 
​a neighborhood and optimize it like we discussed. 
​There's also not always consistency across settings 
​or experiments as researched in 2018. 
​You can also use LIME to hide 
​biases and can easily fool others with it, 
​which is not a very explainable property of LIME. 
​This was studied by Slack et al in 2020. 
