# Anchors

​Anchors are brought to us by the same authors as 
​the original line paper in a study called 
​high precision model agnostic explanations. 
​With anchors, you will see a lot 
​of similarities to the LIME approach. 
​Again, we are explaining individual predictions. 
​But this time, instead of using a linear model to 
​approximate the local decision boundary as with LIME, 
​we are now finding a decision rule 
​that sufficiently anchors the prediction. 
​Anchors are very easy to understand if then 
​rules and are great for classification use cases. 
​A major motivation is that we can't guarantee 
​that local predictions can be 
​approximated with a linear function. 
​Because we don't know what 
​the complex decision boundary actually looks like, 
​which is illustrated here by 
​the pink and blue areas again, 
​we don't actually know if LIME is 
​a good approximation of even local instances. 
​With anchors, we don't have to approximate potentially 
​non-linear or complex local 
​boundaries with linear models. 
​First, A is our anchor, 
​and x is our instance of interest. 
​A rules precision results from 
​evaluating neighbors or perturbations from 
​the distribution of neighbors x matching 
​A using the provided machine learning model, 
​denoted here as 1_f(x) = f(z). 
​And Tau is the precision threshold. 
​Only rules that achieve 
​a local fidelity of at least how are considered valid. 
​Now, constructing particular rules 
​is typically infeasible. 
​Instead, we create a probabilistic definition. 
​Before we talk more about this, 
​we need to define the concept of coverage. 
​Coverage is an anchors probability 
​of applying to its neighbors. 
​Note here that there exists 
​a trade-off between coverage and precision. 
​The anchor's approach uses 
​four main components to find explanations. 
​First, candidate generation. 
​This generates new explanation candidates. 
​In the first round, it creates 
​one candidate per feature 
​of the instance being explained, 
​x, where each candidate fixes 
​the respective value of possible perturbations. 
​In subsequent rounds, 
​the best candidates from the previous round are 
​extended by adding one feature predicate 
​that is not yet included in them. 
​Next, best candidate identification. 
​This component compares candidate rules to 
​determine which one explains the instance x, the best. 
​To do this, it creates perturbations that match 
​the currently observed rule and 
​evaluates them by calling the model. 
​However, these model calls need to be 
​minimized to limit computational overhead. 
​At the core of this component is 
​a pure exploration, multi-armed bandit algorithm. 
​Multi-armed bandits are used 
​to efficiently explore and exploit 
​different strategies called arms in 
​analogy to slot machines using sequential selection. 
​In this setting, each candidate rule 
​is considered an arm that can be pulled. 
​Each time an arm is pulled, 
​respective neighbors are evaluated, 
​and we obtain more information 
​about the candidate rules payoff, 
​precision in the case of anchors. 
​The precision indicates how well 
​the rule describes the instance being explained. 
​Then candidate precision validation. 
​This component takes more samples 
​if there is no statistical confidence, 
​yet that the candidate 
​exceeds the specific threshold Tau. 
​Finally, the modified beam search. 
​This component assembles all of 
​the above components into a beam search, 
​which is a graph search algorithm and 
​a variant of the breadth-first algorithm. 
​It carries over the B best candidates 
​from each round to the next round, 
​where B is the beam width. 
​These B best rules are then used to create new rules. 
​At every round I, it generates candidates with 
​exactly I predicates and selects the B best among them. 
​By setting a high value for B, 
​the algorithm is more likely to avoid local optima, 
​but this requires a high number of model calls 
​and thereby increases the computational load. 
​Here is an illustration of 
​the four components we discussed on the last slide. 
​You have instance x to be explained. 
​Parameters include model f and perturbation space D, 
​and hyperameters, beam width B, 
​and precision threshold Tau. 
​The beam search assembles all of the other components, 
​which starts with generating new candidates, 
​using the multi-armed bandit to select 
​B best candidates and 
​determining if the best rule passes Tau, 
​and if so, measures the coverage. 
​The anchor then is the candidate 
​having the highest coverage. 
​Here are a few examples of anchors in practice. 
​Here is a table and a figure from the original paper, 
​where you can see simple if then 
​anchors used for tabular data sets. 
​Figure 5 shows both the LIME explanation 
​in B and anchor explanation 
​in C. Both are useful for 
​explaining the model prediction instance. 
​Similar to LIME when we use anchors for images, 
​we use a set of super pixels. 
​You can see the anchor for 
​beagle is shown here in sub-figure b. 
​Anchors of a machine translation system are shown in 
​bold for prediction of the Portuguese word for this esta. 
​One call out when using anchors is 
​that you need to be really careful if 
​you have unbalanced data because 
​the perturbation space reflects the training data. 
​In this example shown here, 
​we want to determine what 
​features lead to a particular prediction. 
​In this particular data set, 
​which is highly unbalanced, 
​explaining instances labeled healthy yields 
​empty rules as 
​all generated neighbors evaluate to healthy. 
​Explanations for instances labeled 
​cancer are overly specific and they comprise 
​many feature predicates since 
​the perturbation space mostly 
​covers values from healthy instances. 
​So what do we do if we have unbalanced data? 
​There are a number of potential 
​mitigation methods and each of these 
​have their own limitations and 
​should be used thoughtfully and carefully. 
​Potential mitigation strategies include defining 
​a custom perturbation space through sampling differently, 
​using a subset of training data or modifying 
​the multi-arm bandit parameters, confidence, 
​and error which could result more samples being drawn, 
​ultimately leading to the minority 
​being sampled more often. 
​In the example shown here from 
​the interpretable machine learning book, 
​they use a more balanced subset of 
​the original data set from which to draw on. 
​Let's evaluate the pros and cons of 
​anchors as an explainable AI technique. 
​Rules are very human understandable, 
​which makes anchors highly explainable. 
​They are model agnostic and highly efficient, 
​and they work when predictions are 
​locally nonlinear or complex. 
​However, anchors require careful parameter tuning. 
​The perturbation function needs 
​to be designed for each use case, 
​and the concept of coverage is 
​still undefined in many domains, 
​so it's difficult to make comparisons using anchors. 
