# Shapley Values

​Let's talk about Shapley values, 
​Shapley values were first introduced back in 1952, 
​and as a coalitional game theory 
​concept. Here's the idea. 
​Duke a generative AI Hackathon annually in the fall. 
​You get two of your friends together to compete as 
​a team or coalition at the Hackathon or game. 
​Let's say you all win a monetary award 
​or payout from the Hackathon. Great job. 
​But now you have to determine how to fairly 
​distribute that payout among 
​your team members based on their contribution. 
​This is where Shapley values come in, 
​they tell us how to fairly 
​distribute payout based on contribution. 
​For our purposes, we can think of a coalition as 
​all of the features used to train 
​our machine learning model or game. 
​The prediction is our payout and the Shapley values 
​tell us how much each feature 
​contributes to our prediction. 
​A recap, Shapley values 
​invented in 1952 are a method from 
​coalitional game theory where 
​game players cooperate in a coalition or team. 
​Shapley values tell us how 
​to fairly distribute the payout 
​to players depending on 
​their contribution to the total payout. 
​Let's go back to our example. 
​How do we go about determining how 
​much of an impact each team member had? 
​Well, we need to examine 
​the individual contribution of each team member. 
​For example, you were a machine learning engineer 
​and you built the entire model that was 
​your winning idea so maybe you should have 
​a higher individual contribution to the end payout. 
​We also have to consider the 
​interaction effects between players. 
​You were only able to build that model because of 
​your friend Case's ability to 
​do web scraping for the data set. 
​Without Case, you would not have had as big of 
​an individual contribution. But how do we do this? 
​In this example, we jump into a time machine and we go 
​back and we redo the Hackathon with 
​different subsets of the original team. 
​We average over the contributions of each subset and get 
​the marginal contribution of each player on the team. 
​I really like this explanation of the interpretation 
​of Shapley values from 
​the interpretable machine learning book. 
​How to interpret the Shapley value. 
​Given the current state of feature values, 
​the contribution of a feature value 
​to the difference between 
​the actual prediction and 
​the mean prediction is the estimated Shapley value. 
​How to not interpret the Shapley value. 
​The Shapley value of 
​a feature value is not the difference 
​of the predicted value after 
​removing the feature from the model training. 
​It's really easy to interpret 
​Shapley values incorrectly, 
​so make sure to keep this in mind as you're using them. 
​Let's dive deeper into the math. 
​We can find the Shapley value for 
​feature J by finding the difference between 
​the subset prediction with feature J included 
​and the subset prediction without feature J included. 
​We weigh this based on the total number 
​of features in our subset, 
​and then we sum them over the subset 
​of features used in the model. 
​In practice, models usually 
​have a fixed number of inputs, 
​so we can't just remove features. 
​What we typically do instead is replace 
​the feature with a random value from our training set. 
​Over all of the subsets, 
​the relevance of these random values is sampled out. 
​You can see this visualized here, 
​where we created a subset 
​of feature two and feature three, 
​and we replaced feature one and feature four with 
​random values from those features 
​in our training dataset. 
​Let's evaluate the pros and cons of 
​Shapley values as an explainable AI technique. 
​The difference between the prediction 
​and the average prediction 
​is fairly distributed among 
​the feature values of the instance. 
​This enables contrastive explanations, 
​so you can compare to the average prediction, 
​a subset, or even a single data point 
​and it's based on theory, rather than assumptions. 
​For example, we talked about how 
​lime assumes local linear behavior. 
​On the other hand, computation time is very high. 
​The total number of subsets of a set is 2^n. 
​Because of this, it requires 
​approximation to be practical, 
​which we're going to talk about in the Shap video. 
​Like we discussed, Shapley values 
​can be easily misinterpreted. 
​It also always uses all of the features, 
​and you need access to 
​the data in order to compute your Shapley values. 
