# Functional Decomposition

​Functional decomposition is a key concept in xAI, 
​which is why we are discussing it first. 
​Functional decomposition divides complex models 
​into simpler constituent parts. 
​Each part or function can then be analyzed separately, 
​making it easier to understand 
​the overall behavior of the model. 
​We break down a machine learning model 
​into the following components, 
​main effects, how each feature affects the prediction, 
​independent of the values of 
​the other feature, interaction effect, 
​the joint effect of the features, and the intercept, 
​what the prediction is when 
​all other feature effects are set to zero. 
​There are a number of ways to do this, 
​including functional ANOVA and accumulated local effects. 
​We are going to talk about accumulated 
​local effects later in this module. 
​In this visualization of 
​functional decomposition from 
​the interpretable machine learning book, 
​you can see the main effects of 
​two features X_1 and X_2 shown in the top plots. 
​The bottom plot shows 
​the interaction between X_1 and X_2. 
​This concept of breaking a model down into 
​its constituent parts is 
​a core concept for 
​global explanations, as we will soon see. 
​Functional ANOVA is 
​one method for functional decomposition. 
​Its components include additive decomposition, 
​where you decompose the prediction function 
​f(x) of a model into a sum of terms, 
​where each term represents the effect of 
​one or more input features on the prediction. 
​Individual contributions. 
​By breaking down the prediction function 
​into these additive components, 
​this allows for an analysis of how much 
​each feature and their interactions 
​contributes to the model's output. 
​Interaction effects. Lastly, we 
​quantify interaction effects between the features. 
​Let's evaluate the pros and cons of 
​functional decomposition as an explainable AI technique. 
​Functional decomposition provides us with 
​the theoretical justification for decomposing 
​high dimensional and complex machine learning models 
​into individual effects and interactions. 
​However, in practice, it is 
​difficult because of the computational requirements. 
​Also, it is more appropriate for 
​tabular data than for image or text data. 
