# Feature Interaction

​[MUSIC] 
​Building off of functional decomposition, let's introduce feature interaction. 
​When we consider decomposition, 
​we first decompose a model prediction into a constant term, a term for 
​each feature and a term for the interaction between factors. 
​Let's take a look at an example. 
​Ive added a table predicting car prices. 
​In the upper right corner of this slide, there are only two features, 
​fuel type and brand. 
​The base price for a gasoline non luxury car is $30,000. 
​We consider this our constant term. 
​Our fuel type term is plus $20,000 for electric and 0 for gasoline. 
​And our brand term is plus $40,000 for luxury and 0o for non-luxury. 
​Finally, our interaction term this is where feature interaction comes in. 
​To estimate the interaction strength, we can measure how much of the variation 
​of the prediction depends on the interaction of the features, and 
​we can do this with something called the H statistic. 
​In 2008, Friedman and Popescu introduced the H statistic, which we use for 
​feature interaction. 
​They introduce both the two way h statistic, 
​which which looks at the interaction between two features, j and k, and 
​they introduce the total h statistic, which looks at the interaction between 
​feature j and all other features in these figures. 
​From the original data, 
​you can clearly visualize the feature interaction strength. 
​This gives us an easy to understand visual to understand how different features 
​are interacting, let's take a quick look at the math for the h statistic, 
​which iterates over all of the data points, and at each point the partial 
​dependence is evaluated, which in turn is done with all n data points. 
​The h statistic for the interaction between j and 
​k is shown on the left, and the statistic for the interaction between j and 
​any other feature is shown on the right. 
​One thing that we must acknowledge is the computational cost associated with feature 
​interaction and how this affects the practical implementation. 
​In the worst case, we need two n squared calls to the machine learning 
​model's predict function to compute the two way h statistic j versus k, and 
​we need three n squared for the total h statistic, which is j versus all. 
​To speed up the computation, we can sample from the n data points. 
​It's important to note here that this increases the variance of the partial 
​dependence estimates, which can make the h statistics unstable. 
​Interpreting the h statistic can be challenging, 
​as we will discuss in the next slide. 
​But the standard interpretation is if the h statistic is zero, no interaction. 
​If the total h statistic is one, all of the variance of the function is explained 
​by the sum of the partial dependence functions. 
​If the 2-weight H statistic is 1, each single partial dependence function is 
​constant, and the effect on the prediction only comes through the interaction. 
​So let's evaluate the pros and 
​cons of feature interaction as an explainable AI technique. 
​Feature interaction provides us with a meaningful interpretation that is 
​dimensionless, so we can use it to compare across both features and models. 
​However, it is computationally expensive. 
​Results can be unstable due to the inherent variance in the statistic itself. 
​Like many XAI approaches, it doesn't work with highly correlated features. 
​Finally, the h statistic can be greater than one, making it hard to interpret. 
