# Permutation Feature Importance

​The importance of a feature can be measured by calculating how much model's 
​prediction error increases after permuting the feature. 
​If shuffling a feature's value increases the model's error, 
​the feature is important. 
​If the model error doesn't change after shuffling a feature's values, 
​a feature is considered unimportant. 
​This concept was first introduced for random forests in 2001. 
​It was updated to be model agnostic and renamed model reliance in 2018. 
​Let's walk through the model agnostic method developed in 2018 called 
​model reliance. 
​Our input is the trained model f, hat, feature matrix x, 
​target vector y, and an error measure. 
​First, we estimate the original model error. 
​The mean squared error is commonly used here. 
​Then, for each feature, 
​we generate feature matrix x perm by permuting feature j in the data x. 
​This breaks the association between feature j and the true outcome y. 
​Next, we estimate the error based on the predictions of the permuted data. 
​We calculate the permutation feature importance either as a quotient or 
​a difference. 
​Lastly, we sort features by descending feature importance. 
​Here is an example visualization of the importance for 
​each feature in predicting byte counts with a support vector machine model. 
​These plots are fairly intuitive, with temperature exhibiting 
​the greatest importance, which is shown here at the top. 
​Let's evaluate the pros and cons of permutation feature importance or 
​model reliance as an explainable AI technique. 
​This method is easy to interpret. 
​It provides global insight into model behavior, and 
​it does not require retraining the model. 
​However, because the method depends on shuffling the feature, 
​which adds randomness to the measurement when repeated, the results might vary. 
​If features are correlated, it can be biased by unrealistic data instances. 
​There are alternative ways of calculating feature importance. 
​Model specific feature importance examples include the Gini importance in random 
​forests and standardized regression coefficients in regression models. 
​An alternative to permutation based feature importance is 
​variance based feature importance measures like functional Anova, 
​which was previously discussed, there are many measures. 
​We will not cover them specifically in this course, but 
​here is a diagram showing many of these approaches from a 2015 paper. 
