# Counterfactual Explanations

​[MUSIC] 
​Counterfactuals describe a causal situation. 
​If x had not occurred, y would not have occurred. 
​We can simulate counterfactuals for predictions of a black box machine 
​learning model by changing the feature values of an instance 
​before making the predictions and analyzing how the prediction changes. 
​A counterfactual explanation of a prediction describes the smallest change 
​to the feature values that changed the prediction to a predefined output. 
​An example of a counterfactual that follows the pattern if X had not occurred, 
​Y would not have occurred. 
​If I hadn't forgotten my umbrella, I wouldn't have gotten soaked in the rain. 
​Let's consider an intuitive example. 
​You're applying for machine learning jobs and you are unsure about your chances of 
​landing your desired job at a top tech company. 
​You decide to put together a model using historical data of applicants with 
​features like education, work experience, skills, projects, and 
​interview preparation hours to predict your probability of receiving a job offer. 
​The model predicts your chances of receiving a job offer as 75%. 
​That's okay, but you want to maximize your chances, you want greater than 90%. 
​You begin experimenting with the feature values to see how you could have 
​improved your predicted outcome. 
​You learn that if you had an additional two years of work experience, 
​your chances would increase to 85%. 
​However, gaining two years of experience is not immediately actionable. 
​You then focus on factors within your control, such as interview preparation and 
​specific skill enhancements. 
​You discover the [INAUDIBLE] that if you dedicate 50 more hours to interview 
​preparation and 
​complete a course in explainable AI, your predicted success rate would rise to 92%. 
​By exploring these counterfactual scenarios, 
​you use your model to make data driven decisions. 
​Our intuitive example shows building counterfactual explanations via trial and 
​error approach. 
​But we are machine learning engineers, there must be a better way. 
​We can use an optimization algorithm to minimize loss. 
​One, define a loss function. 
​This loss takes this input, the instance of interest, a counterfactual, and 
​the desired counterfactual outcome. 
​Find the counterfactual explanation that minimizes this loss using an optimization 
​algorithm. 
​There are many methods for 
​this which differ in their definition of the loss function and optimization method. 
​The image shown here shows iterations to build counterfactual explanations. 
​This is a sample of interest from the MNIST dataset and 
​a generated counterfactual. 
​We have also visualized the difference between them to show what pixels needed to 
​be changed for this to be misclassified as a six. 
​In the guided programming exercise, 
​you will develop your own counterfactuals using the MNIST dataset. 
​Let's evaluate the pros and 
​cons of counterfactual explanations as an explainable AI technique. 
​Counterfactual explanations have clear interpretation, do not require access 
​to the data or the model, and is relatively easy to implement. 
​However, the Rashomon effect makes the use of counterfactuals challenging. 
​The Rashomon effect refers to the phenomenon where different people give 
​drastically different accounts or descriptions of the same event or 
​experience. 
​The term originates from the 1950 Japanese film, Rashomon. 
​In the film, the same incident is described in four contradictory ways by 
​four witnesses or participants. 
​Each account is plausible and self consistent, but 
​they are all fundamentally incompatible with each other. 
​It is the same with counterfactuals. 
​For each instance, you will usually find multiple counterfactual explanations, and 
​there's no standardized way on how to report them. 
