# Influential Instances

​Deleting a training data instance 
​can affect the resulting model. 
​A training instance is considered influential if 
​its deletion from the training data 
​considerably changes the parameters or predictions. 
​By identifying influential training instances, 
​we can debug models and 
​better explain their behaviors and predictions. 
​Influential instances help us answer questions about 
​global model behavior and about individual predictions. 
​Which were the most influential instances 
​for the model parameters or the predictions overall? 
​Which were the most influential instances 
​for a particular prediction? 
​There are two major types of influential instances, 
​deletion diagnostics and influence functions. 
​One note is that influential instances 
​are not model agnostic. 
​Each type has its own specific requirements. 
​You have decided to estimate 
​the average GPA of Coursera students, 
​so you sample your classmates in your XEI class. 
​For a moment, let's ignore your sampling approach. 
​How much can your average GPA 
​be influenced by a single person? 
​With the deletion approach, 
​you recalculate the mean for each person in the dataset, 
​omitting one of the student GPAs each time, 
​and measure how much the mean estimate changes. 
​With influence functions, you up 
​weight one of the persons by a very small weight. 
​This corresponds to calculating 
​the first derivative of a statistic or a model. 
​Detecting influential data points is 
​crucial in building robust machine learning models. 
​Let's explore two popular techniques, 
​DF Beta and Cook's distance. 
​First, let's talk about DF Beta. 
​DF Beta measures the effect of 
​deleting an instance on the models parameters. 
​It's particularly useful for 
​models with weight parameters 
​such as logistic regression or neural networks. 
​By calculating DF Beta, 
​you can identify instances that have 
​a disproportionate influence on 
​the model's learned weights. 
​Next, we have Cook's distance. 
​This metric measures the effect of 
​deleting an instance on the model's predictions. 
​Originally created for linear regression models, 
​Cook's distance includes a square term 
​and the mean squared error. 
​However, it can be modified to work with 
​other model types by removing these specific terms. 
​The math and process behind 
​these techniques are relatively simple. 
​For DF Beta, you remove an instance, 
​recalculate the weight vector, 
​and compare it to the weight vector 
​obtained with all instances. 
​And for Cook's distance, you remove an instance, 
​recalculate the model predictions, 
​and compare them to the predictions 
​obtained with all instances. 
​Influence functions introduced in 
​2017 introduce an alternative to deletion diagnostics. 
​Instead of deleting training instances, 
​influence functions can be used to 
​approximate how much the model changes 
​when you upwate the loss of 
​a training instance by an infinitesimally small step, 
​which results in a new model parameter. 
​This requires access to 
​the loss gradient with respect to the model parameters, 
​so only some models qualify, 
​like logistic regression, 
​support vector machines, and neural networks. 
​Here are examples of influence functions 
​from the original 2017 paper. 
​In figure 1B, 
​you can see the test image and 
​a harmful training image with the same label. 
​The presence of the training image makes the model 
​think that the test image is less likely to be a seven. 
​This is an example of a harmful training image. 
​When classifying between fish and dogs, 
​a helpful trained dog image is shown in Figure 4. 
​This training image has been shown 
​to be influential in helping 
​the inception model correctly 
​classify the test image here as a fish. 
​One note before we wrap up influential instances. 
​You may be thinking that influential instances 
​look pretty similar to outliers. 
​However, influential instances 
​look at relationships between 
​the instance and their 
​corresponding model parameters to predictions, 
​whereas outliers look at the relationship 
​between an instance and the other instances or data. 
​An influential instance is not 
​necessarily an outlier and vice versa. 
​If an outlier influences a model, 
​it is an influential instance. 
​Now, let's evaluate the pros and cons of 
​influential instances as an explainable AI technique. 
​Influential instances are great for 
​debugging and deletion diagnostics, 
​are mostly model-agnostic. 
​These methods can be used to 
​compare different machine-learning models. 
​However, they are computationally expensive, 
​and it's important to note that 
​influence functions are only approximates. 
