# XAI in Diffusion Models

​[MUSIC] 
​Diffusion models are a class of generative models that have shown remarkable 
​success in image generation tasks. 
​They work by gradually adding noise to an initial image and 
​then learning to reverse this diffusion process to generate high-quality, 
​diverse images from random noise. 
​The key idea behind diffusion models is to define a Markov chain that 
​starts with a data distribution like images, and 
​gradually adds noise until the final state is pure gaussian noise. 
​During the reverse process, the model learns to generate samples from 
​the data distribution by removing the noise step-by-step. 
​Diffusion models are generally more stable to train compared to GANs, 
​which can suffer from mode collapse and other training instabilities. 
​The release of open-source diffusion models like stable diffusion 
​has democratized access to powerful image generation capabilities. 
​Enabling a wide range of applications in areas like art design and media creation. 
​The figure shown here is from the seminal paper and 
​latent diffusion models the model behind stable diffusion. 
​Let's review a few components of diffusion models starting with this component. 
​This is a variational autoencoder, it converts images to and from latent space. 
​You can think of this model as a translator, 
​it is pre-trained on a large dataset of images. 
​The training process involves trying to encode to latent space and 
​accurately recreate the training image. 
​Next, let's look at the conditioning element encoder, 
​it encodes the user prompt into latent space. 
​In text to image generation, this is a text encoder, 
​in image-to-image generation, this is an image encoder. 
​The user prompt is used to inform each step of the denoising unit, 
​guiding the unit to give a certain output. 
​This component is the denoising U-Net, it guides the reverse diffusion process. 
​Similar to GANs, you start with a random latent image, 
​the U-Net predicts how much noise there is. 
​Noise is subtracted from the last random latent image, and 
​user input guides the U-Net. 
​It repeats this process n times. 
​The training process of a diffusion model involves two forward diffusion. 
​In this step, 
​the model learns to gradually add noise to the original data distribution, 
​creating a series of perturbed data distributions, this is shown here. 
​And a reverse diffusion process. 
​The model is trained to reverse the forward diffusion process, 
​starting from pure noise and gradually removing the noise to reconstruct 
​the original data distribution. 
​During the generation process, 
​the model starts with random noise and iteratively denoises it, 
​producing a high-quality image, at the end of the reverse diffusion process. 
​The user text prompt is passed through a text encoder and 
​used to guide this process through the U-Net. 
​Now that we have reviewed diffusion models we will discuss a few emerging research 
​trends and explainability in diffusion model image generation. 
​Starting with counterfactual explanations demonstrated by Jeanneret et al. 
​Here is a figure from the paper which shows counterfactual explanations in 
​diffusion models. 
​Parc et al, proposes methods for 
​visualizing diffusion model image generation. 
​These methods include DF-RISE or diffusion randomized input sampling explanation. 
​This method visualizes the denoising regions that the diffusion model focuses 
​on at each step, by generating saliency maps using randomized input masking and 
​a structural similarity function tailored for generative models. 
​And DF-CAM diffusion gradient-weighted class activation mapping. 
​This method visualizes the internal workings of the diffusion model by 
​highlighting the specific visual concepts the model attends to at each 
​denoising step using gradient-weighted activation maps. 
​And exponential time step sampling. 
​This method adjusts the time step sampling strategy during the reverse diffusion 
​process to concentrate on specific stages, early, middle, or late, 
​allowing analysis of the visual concepts emphasized at different time stages. 
​And relevance score. 
​The paper employs a relevance score between the generated image and 
​the input text prompt to quantify and 
​analyze the visual concepts manifested at different time steps and stages. 
​Here you can see a figure from Park et al, 
​where they compare their methods DF-RISE and DF-CAM with lime. 
​While lime depends on the segmentation region shown here, 
​DF-RISE visualizes the decision process unaffected by external factors. 
​Tang et al, introduced DAAM in 2022, a method for 
​cross-attention pixel attribution visualization. 
​They produce pixel level attribution maps by upscaling and 
​aggregating cross attention word pixel scores in the denoising subnetwork. 
​The key idea is to repurpose the existing cross-attention from the diffusion 
​model as a means to attribute which words influence which image regions. 
​Example figures from the paper are shown here. 
​In the left figure DAAM maps for monkey hat and 
​walking are shown overlaid on the original generated image. 
​The figure on the right shows damn heat maps for 
​different parts of speech like adjective, verb, and noun. 
​The DAAM process is as start with a pre trained latent diffusion model for 
​text to image synthesis like stable diffusion 2.0. 
​Identify the cross-attention layers in the U-Net denoising 
​network that attend text embeddings to spatial image representations. 
​Collect the attention score arrays from these cross-attention layers across 
​different scales, down sampling and upsampling blocks of the unit. 
​Upscale the attention score arrays to the original 
​image size using bicubic interpolation sum. 
​The upscaled attention score arrays across heads, layers, 
​and time steps to obtain a single aggregated attention map per word. 
​The aggregated attention map associates words with image regions 
​where higher values indicate stronger attribution. 
​Optionally threshold the aggregated attention map using a percentage 
​of the maximum value to generate a binary segmentation mask. 
​When applying diffusion models to image generation, 
​there is variability in the generated output. 
​This variability is a result of stochastic elements that are inherent to the process 
​of diffusion, including random initialization of the diffusion process, 
​sampling from probability distributions, and nonlinear activations. 
​While variability is inherent to diffusion models, 
​there are differences in the level of variability across different models 
​due to differences in model architecture training procedures. 
​Including approximations and techniques used to control or 
​guide the generation process. 
​When applying these models to real-world problems, the challenge lies in 
​reconciling the desire for diversity and creativity in generated outputs with 
​the need for consistency and coherence relative to the input prompt. 
​Quantifying the consistency or repeatability of generated outputs would 
​allow for the quantification of this variability and would enable decisions to 
​be made on this reconciliation between creativity and consistency. 
​When deciding on a diffusion model for a particular application or task. 
​This quantification can provide an assessment of model stability and 
​consistency, detect unintended bias, validate interpretations of model outputs, 
​and enhance user understanding. 
​In this paper, I proposed a semantic approach to quantifying consistency in 
​diffusion model image generation. 
​This approach uses a multimodal embedding model clip to generate embeddings of 
​images generated n times and 
​takes a pairwise cosine similarity over the n generated image embeddings. 
​While not currently used frequently in explainability, multimodal embedding 
​models are a very interesting tool that can be used for explainability. 
​We have to be cautious about inherent biases in these multimodal models and, 
​similar to all explainability metrics, 
​have to be thoughtful about the limitations of the approach. 
