# The Black Box: Motivation for XAI

​You may have heard machine learning models, 
​and in particular, 
​deep learning models be referred to as black box models. 
​In the context of AI, 
​black box models refer to models where the input 
​and output are represented 
​in ways that humans understand, 
​but the information representations within the model 
​are not represented in ways that a human can understand. 
​Let's first consider representations of information. 
​What are the ways in which humans 
​communicate with one another? 
​Humans communicate with language, 
​either spoken or written, 
​contained within language are 
​concepts of numbers and symbols. 
​We can also communicate via images, 
​visual representations of our thoughts and ideas. 
​Machines on the other hand, 
​only communicate via numbers. 
​With the exception of quantum computers, 
​computers today boil every concept 
​or idea down into ones and zeros, 
​open or closed gates on 
​the electrical components on which computers are built. 
​We have learned to convert our 
​representations of information like 
​language and images into 
​numbers for a computer to understand. 
​For example, a color image is broken down into 
​pixels and numeric values representing how much red, 
​green, and blue are in each pixel, 
​and these are the representations of 
​information that exist in that image. 
​Similarly, text is broken 
​down into tokens or parts of text, 
​which are typically represented 
​as fixed length vectors and 
​numbers that are a compressed version 
​of the meaning of the token. 
​Depending on the method used to 
​generate this fixed length vector or embedding, 
​this vector could contain 
​semantic and conceptual definitions 
​of the token and even the context 
​in which the token is used. 
​This is especially useful for cases like the one here 
​in which the word bank can have multiple meanings, 
​depending on the context or what words are around it. 
​What this means is that we can put 
​a human understandable input, 
​like an image or a text-based question 
​into a machine learning model, 
​and the model should be able to represent 
​its output in a form that humans can understand. 
​Whether that is a series of numbers 
​representing bounding boxes of an object in an image, 
​a class label, or a string of tokens. 
​Now let's return to our black box. 
​We have an input that humans can 
​understand and we have an output 
​that humans can understand, 
​but what is going on inside this black box? 
​That's what we're here to talk about today. 
​First, a brief review of the black box. 
​Since a number of traditional machine learning methods 
​have varying degrees of interpretability, 
​more on that in a few minutes, 
​I'm going to focus here on deep learning models, 
​which are based on a neural network architecture. 
​In a neural network architecture, 
​we have layers of nodes. 
​Each node takes a weighted sum of its inputs and 
​passes this through 
​an often non-linear activation function. 
​For each node in our network, 
​we have some amount of weights for 
​our weighted sum and a 
​bias component that needs to be set. 
​The way we set these is 
​through training the neural network, 
​where we pass training data through the network 
​and iteratively update these weights and biases. 
​Neural networks can have thousands, 
​millions, even trillions of weights. 
​As we add more layers to a neural network, 
​it gains the ability to extract 
​increasingly abstract features from the input data. 
​While this can enhance performance, 
​it also becomes further from 
​our human understandable representation. 
​Different architectures can also 
​result in more abstraction. 
​When your neural network arrives at an output, 
​we often have no idea 
​how the model reached the conclusion. 
​Here is a great visualization of 
​this abstraction and a very 
​simple convolutional neural network. 
​This visualization was developed by Adam Harley. 
​The link will be provided in course resources, 
​so you can check it out for yourself. 
​The way this visualization 
​works is that at each node of the network, 
​we can actually output 
​a human understandable representation 
​of what the model sees. 
​First, I'm going to draw a number. 
​A numeric representation of 
​this number is going to be our input layer to the model. 
​Next, I'm going to display 
​the first layer of the neural network. 
​You can see the image representations 
​look mostly the same as the input layer. 
​We're going to add a down sampling layer, 
​which basically just makes everything smaller. 
​Our second layer of the network abstracts 
​our original input a lot 
​to the point that we can't even recognize the two. 
​Our next layers abstract information 
​further and further into fully connected layers. 
​Finally, we map everything back to 
​our human understandable output and our model prediction. 
​A side note here that I want to emphasize, 
​because there's a lot of confusion around this point. 
​A black box model does not mean 
​a model in which we cannot reproduce the result. 
​If we have the model architecture, 
​including trained weights, the same input data, 
​and the random seed used to produce the output 
​for models containing some stochastic process, 
​such as dropout layers or 
​certain types of attention mechanisms, 
​then we can reproduce the result. 
​The idea around black box models is 
​that while we may have the trained weights, 
​these weights are not understandable by humans. 
​In just a minute, we will talk about transparency, 
​which is where the reproducibility comes into play. 
​Now, perhaps you're wondering to yourself, who cares? 
​If I had the answer or model output, 
​why do I need to understand 
​how the model arrived at the answer? 
​Let's consider a few examples. 
​One, you submit your resume to a company that 
​uses an AI algorithm to select people to interview. 
​You're not selected, even though your resume is 
​a perfect match with the skills and 
​requirements posted in the job description. 
​You reach out to the company's recruiting team, 
​and they can't tell you why your application didn't make 
​the cut because the model only 
​gave an output with no explanation. 
​It turns out that they use 
​current employee resumes in their training process, 
​and many of the current employees had 
​bocce ball as a skill in their resume. 
​You did not, and you didn't make the cut, 
​despite bocce ball not being a part of 
​the job description or necessary skill set for the job. 
​Now, replace bocce ball with 
​a specific gender or ethnicity. 
​You applied for a loan, and you were denied, 
​despite having an excellent credit score. 
​When you call the bank, they admit that they are now 
​using an AI algorithm to process loan applications, 
​and they aren't sure why your loan was denied. 
​You go to the hospital in 
​our triage using an AI algorithm. 
​You were sent to the back of the 
​line and required to wait 
​three hours for treatment 
​while kids with a cold are seen right away. 
​The AI algorithm is using information about 
​your socioeconomic status to triage you. 
​Even though that data wasn't seen as important by 
​the engineers training the algorithm, 
​so they just left it in. 
​These examples, while fictional, 
​are based in reality. 
​Recruitment, finances, and healthcare are 
​three high stakes domains that 
​are actively using AI tools. 
​Now, how about a real example? 
​In 2023, the Detroit Police 
​used facial recognition technology, 
​computer vision machine learning models, 
​and falsely identified Porcha Woodruff 
​as a carjacking suspect. 
​She was arrested while eight months 
​pregnant for a crime she did not commit. 
​Why did the models identify Porcha as a suspect? 
​They were unable to determine 
​the reasons the model identified her picture. 
​These are just a few examples 
​of where a lack of understanding 
​around a model's decisions can 
​have significant consequences, 
​and that is where we are going to kick off 
​our introduction to explainable AI. 